Financial Administration Act, 2003 Act
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
Part I—Controland ManagementofPublicFunds
. 1. Powers and responsibilities of the Minister
2. Duties of the Minister
3. Appointment and duties of tire Controller and Accountant-General
4. Appointment and duties of the Deputy Controller and Accountant-General
Part II—Public Funds
5. Public fluids
6. Consolidated Fund
,7 7. The ContingencyFund
8. Other special funds
9. Custody of public moneys and moneys received in trust for Government
10. Payment for services rendered by Government departments
11. Receipt and payment of deposits
12. Deletion from the accounts
13. Payment out of the Consolidated Fund
14. Appropriation of public money
15. Charges on appropriation and orders for disbursement
16. Payment for work done
17. Payment for contracts
18. Government contracts
19. Modalities for making payments out ofthe Consolidated Fund
20. Balance of appropriation
1*7^2 i. Investment of public moneys in securities
22. Advances from the Consolidated Fund
23. Loans from the Consolidated Fund
24. Equity investments of the Consolidated Fund
Part III—Revenue and Expenditure
25. Estimates of revenue and expenditure
26. Expenditure in advance of appropriation
27. Duration of appropriations and warrants
28. Tax revenue
29. Non-tax revenue

Act 654 Financial Administration Act, 2003
Part IV—GovernmentStores
3 0. Government stores
31. Joint acquisition of stores
32. Responsibility for government stores
33. Procurement of stores
34. Transfer of Government stores
35. Discharge of accountability for Government stores
36. Special enquiiy
37. Application of stores
Part V—accountsand Audit
38. Basis of accounts
39. Classification of accounts
40. Monthly statement of public accounts
41. Annual statement of accounts
42. Closure of accounts
43. Financial year
44. Audit of accounts
Part Vl—Statutory Corporationsand other Public
Institutions
45. Application of this Part
46. Financial year of corporation
47. Funds of a corporation
48. Bank accounts
49. Special accounts with Government
50. Payment over of surplus money
51. Investments of moneys
52. Award of contracts
53. Reserves
54. Books, accounts and audit
55. Annual report
56. The Board of Directors to ensure preparation of accounts
57. Board of Directors responsibility for tire collection and receipt of moneys due to
public corporations
5 8. Efficiency and operational auditing
59. Minister’s power of direction
2

Financial Administration Act, 2003 Act 654
Part VII—Liability, Offencesand Penalties
60. Responsibility of accounting officers
61. Liability to keep public money
62. Offences
63. Government properly
64. Deduction from money due by the Government
65. Transfer of Government property
Part VIII—EstablishmentofFinancialAdministration
Tribunal
66. Establishment ofTribunal
67. Jurisdiction of theTribunal
68. Enforcement of Order of the Tribunal
69. Compensation and Reparation
70. Appeal
71. Right of the Attorney-General to Order Prosecution
Part IX—Miscellaneous
72. Government appointee reporting obligations
73. Regulations
74. Interpretation
75. Repeals, savings and modifications
76. Commencement
3

Act 654
The Six Hundred and fifty-fourth
ACT
OF THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF GHANA
ENTITLED
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION ACT, 2003
AN ACT to regulate the financial management of the public sector; prescribe
the responsibilities of persons entrusted with financial management in
the government; ensure the effective and efficient management of state
revenue, expenditure, assets, liabilities, resources of the government, the
Consolidated Fund and other public funds and to provide for matters
related to these.
Date of ASSENT: 28th October, 2003.
BE IT ENACTED by Parliament as follows:
Part I—Controland Management of Public Funds
Pow ers and responsibilities of the Minister
1. (1) The Minister shall
(a) develop and implement a macro economic and fiscal policy
framework for the country and shall
(i) supervise and monitor the finances of the country; and
(ii) co-ordinate international and intergovernmental financial
and fiscal relations;
4

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
(b) advise Government on the total resources to be allocated to the
public sector and the appropriate level of resources to be allocated
to individual programmes and activities within that sector.
(2) The Minister shall ensure that periodically and not less than once a year
(a) the fiscal policy of Government; and
(b) a statement of the current and projected state of the economy
and finances
are presented to Parliament.
(3) The Minister shall ensure that
(a) systems are established throughout the public sector
(i) to budget for the use of resources; and
(ii) to approve requests for the issue of public money prior
/x to inclusion in estimates of expenditure for submission
to Parliament in accordance with this Act;
(b) when Parliament has approved the Consolidated Fund
Expenditure Estimates, authority to disburse funds to meet the
expenditure is conveyed to Principal Account Holders through
the Controller and Accountant-General; and
(c) transparent systems are established and maintained which
(i) provide a full account to Parliament for the use of
resources and public moneys; and
(ii) ensure the exercise of regularity and propriety in the
handling and expenditure of public funds.
(4) Approval of withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund of moneys
allocated by Parliament shall be by warrant signed by the Minister.
Duties of the Minister
2. (1) The Minister shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and any
other enactment, have responsibility for the management and control of
the Consolidated Fund and such other public funds as shall be designated as
being in the care of the Minister and of matters relating to the financial affairs
of the Government.
(2) The Minister may make such regulations or may give such directions
not inconsistent with this Act as may appear to the Minister to be necessary
and expedient for the proper implementation of the intent and purpose of this
Act and the safety, economy and advantage of public revenue and property.
(3) The Minister shall ensure that any directions given under this
section are brought to the notice of persons directly affected.
(4) The Minister may cause the inspection of the books, records and
offices of a department.
5

Act 654
Financial Administration Act, 2003
Appointment and duties of the Controller and Accountant-General
3. (1) There shall be appointed in accordance with article 195 of the
Constitution, a Controller and Accountant-General who is responsible to the
Minister for the custody, safety and integrity of the Consolidated Fund and
other public funds designated under the care of the Controller and Accountant-
General.
(2) The Controller and Accountant-General is responsible for the
compilation and management of the accounts prepared in relation to the
Consolidated Fund and other public funds and for this purpose the Controller
and Accountant-General may give general instructions to the Principal Spending
Officers of departments which shall not be inconsistent with this Act or any
regulations or instructions issued under this Act.
(3) The Controller and Accountant-General is the Chief Accounting
Officer of the Government who has responsibility to keep, render and publish
statements of public accounts as required by this Act or any other enactment.
(4) As Chief Accounting Officer, the Controller and Accountant-
General is the chief adviser to the Minister and the government on accountancy
matters and is the person who approves accounting instructions of depart­
ments and promotes the development of efficient accounting systems within
departments.
(5) The Controller and Accountant-General receives, disburses and
provides secure custody for moneys payable into the Consolidated Fund and
other funds and for this purpose shall establish such accounts with the Bank
of Ghana and its agents as are considered necessary for the deposit of the
moneys.
(6) A bank account shall not be opened for any department except
under the authority of the Controller and Accountant-General and a bank shall
not open an account for any department without the authority of the Controller
and Accountant-General.
(7) Without limiting the generality of these duties, the Controller and
Accountant-General shall
(aj in consultation with the Auditor-General, specify for depart­
ments, the accounting basis, policies and the classification
system to be applied in public accounting and ensure that a proper
system of accounting is established in each case; and
(b) ensure, in so far as is practicable, that adequate provisions exist
for the safe custody of public money, securities and accountable
documents.
6

Financial Administration Act. 2003
Act 654
Appointment and duties of Deputy Controller and Accountants-General
4. (1) There shall be appointed in accordance with article 195 of the
Constitution, such number of Deputy Controllers and Accountants-General
as may be considered necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(2) A Deputy Controller and Accountant-General shall perform such
functions of the Controller and Accountant-General as the Controller and
Accountant-General shall determine.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of a Deputy Controller and
Accountant-General shall be as specified in the person's letter of appointment.
Part II—Public Funds
Public funds
5. (1) In accordance with article 175 of the Constitution, the public funds
of Ghana consist of the Consolidated Fund, Contingency Fund and such other
funds as may be established by or under an Act of Parliament.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, any fund other than the
Consolidated Fund shall be governed by the enactment establishing the fund.
Consolidated Fund
6. (1) In accordance with article 176 of the Constitution, there shall be
paid into the Consolidated Fund,
(a) revenue or other moneys raised or received for government
business or on behalf of the Government; and
(b) any other moneys raised or received in trust for or on behalf of
the Government.
(2) The revenue and other moneys referred to in subsection (1) exclude
revenue or other moneys
fx (a) payable by or under an Act of Parliament into some other fund
, established for a specific purpose; or
(b) that may, under an Act of Parliament, be retained by the depart­
ment or agency of Government that received them for the purpose
of defraying the expenses of that department or agency.
(3) Where under sub-section (2) provision is made in any enactment for
an agency of Government to retain its internally generated funds for the purpose
of defraying its expenses pursuant to article 176 (2) (b) of the Constitution,
the agency shall make lull disclosure of internally generated funds to the Minister
at the end of every month.
7

Act 654
Financial Administration Act, 2003
(4) Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in any enactment in
existence immediately before the coming into force of this Act, no investment
in Government securities shall be made of internally generated funds by an
agency of Government without prior approval in writing of the Minister.
The Contingency Fund
7. (1) In accordance with article 177 of the Constitution, there shall be
paid into the Contingency Fund, moneys voted for the purpose by Parliament;
and advances may be made from that Fund by the Committee responsible for
financial matters in Parliament whenever the Committee is satisfied that there
is an urgent or unforseen need for expenditure for which no other provision
exists to meet the need.
(2) Where an advance is made from the Contingency Fund a supple­
mentary estimate shall be presented as soon as possible to Parliament to
replace the amount advanced.
Other special funds
8. (1) Moneys received by or on behalf of the Government for a special
purpose and paid into the Consolidated Fund, may be paid out of that Fund
subject to the provisions of an Act of Parliament.
(2) Subject to any enactment, interest may be allowed in respect of any
money to which subsection (1) applies at rates fixed by the Minister in Regu­
lations or administratively.
’ ;i
Custody of public moneys and moneys received in trust for Government
9. (1) A person who collects or receives public moneys or moneys in trust
for Government shall keep a record of receipts and deposits in a form and
manner that the Controller and Accountant-General may prescribe.
(2) Any person who collects or receives any public moneys or moneys
in trust for Government without the prior authority of the Controller and
Accountant-General shall immediately pay the moneys into the Consolidated
Fund and explain to the Controller and Accountant-General the circumstances'
under which these moneys came into the possession of that person.
(3) Persons authorised to collect or receive public moneys and moneys
in trust for Government shall pay the moneys promptly into the Consolidated
Fund in such manner as may be prescribed in regulations or as the Controller
and Accountant-General may direct.
Payment for sendees rendered by Government departments
10. Where a service is rendered by a department to any person and the
Minister is of the opinion that a charge for that service should be borne by the
8

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
person to whom the service is rendered, the Minister may subject to the provisions
of an enactment relating to that service, prescribe the fees to be charged.
Receipt and payment of deposits
11. (1) Where money is received by a public officer from any person, such
as a deposit to ensure the doing of an act or thing, the public officer shall hold
or dispose of the money in such manner as the Minister may prescribe.
(2) Where money is paid by a person to a public officer for a purpose
that is not fulfilled, the money may, less such sum as in the opinion of the
Minister is properly attributed to service rendered, be returned or repaid or
otherwise dealt with as the Minister may direct.
(3) Money paid to the credit of the Consolidated Fund, not being
public money, may be returned or repaid in such manner as the Minister may
' prescribe.
(4) The Minister may determine the amount of cash or securities held
to meet obligations under this section.
Deletion from the accounts
12. (1) The Minister may, subject to the approval of Parliament, in the
public interest, recommend the deletion from the public accounts or other
government accounts, in whole or in part, of any obligation or debt due to the
Government or any claim by the Government.
(2) The deletion from the accounts does not constitute a remission of
the obligation, debt or claim and does not debar subsequent proceedings for
recovery, should the Minister see fit.
(3) The Minister may by regulation delegate the power of deletion
under this section, subject to such terms and conditions as the Minister may
require, to any public officer who shall personally exercise the delegated powers.
(4) The obligations, debts and claims deleted from the accounts shall
TW be reported in financial statements required under sections 54 and 55 of this Act.
Payment out of the Consolidated Fund
13. (1) A payment shall not be made out of the Consolidated Fund except
as provided by article 178 of the Constitution.
(2) A payment shall not be made in excess of the amount granted
under an appropriation for any service.
(3) The Minister may by legislative instrument prescribe for the
approval of Parliament, procedures to be followed to make payments' out of
the Consolidated Fund in times of emergency.
9

Act 654 Financial Administration Act, 2003
Appropriation of public money
14. (1) When departmental estimates of expenditure are approved by the
President they shall become subject to Article 179 of the Constitution.
(2) Each estimate shall indicate the officer in control of and accountable
for the use of public moneys.
(3) When an appropriation for a department has been approved in
accordance with article 179 of the Constitution, it shall be used only in accor­
dance with the purpose described and within the limits set by the classification
within the estimate of the department.
(4) The Minister may, by legislative instrument, authorise the reallocation
of expenditure within the ambit of a department's appropriation.
Charges on appropriation and orders for disbursement
15. (1) A charge shall not be made against an appropriation except on the
requisition of the appropriate head of the government department for which
the appropriation was made or a deputy authorised by that head.
(2) A requisition for payment out of the Consolidated Fund shall be in
such form, with such documents and certified in such manner as the Controller
and Accountant-General may require.
(3) The Controller and Accountant-General shall reject a requisition
if the Controller and Accountant-General is of the opinion that payment on it
(a) would not be a lawful charge against the appropriation;
(b) would result in expenditure in excess of the appropriation; or
(c) would reduce the balance available in the appropriation in such
a manner that it would not be sufficient to meet the commit­
ments to be charged against it.
(4) The Controller and Accountant-General may transmit to the
Minister any requisition for the direction of the Minister and the Minister may
order that the requisition be made or refused.
(5) The officer named on the requisition may issue an order for payment
to be made on the authority of a requisition certified by the Controller and
Accountant-General as valid for payment.
(6) Where any payment is refused by the Controller and Accountant-
General, the head of department concerned may report the circumstances to
the Minister for decision, and the Minister may confirm or reverse the refusal
of the Controller and Accountant-General and give such directions as are
necessary to carry out the decision.
10

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
Payment for work done
16. (1) Payment shall not be made for work done, goods supplied or services
rendered whether under a contract or not. in connection with any part of the
public service, unless in addition to any other voucher or certificate that is
required, the head of the government department or any other officer authorised
by the head of department certifies
(a) that the work has been performed, the goods supplied or the
service rendered, and that the price charged is according to the
contract or if not specified by the contract, is reasonable; or
(b) where payment is to be made before the completion of the work,
delivery of the goods or rendering of the service, that the
payment is in accordance with the contract.
(2) Where the Controller and Accountant-General reports in respect
of any contract under which a cost audit is required to be made, that any cost
or charges claimed by the contractor should not be allowed, the costs or charges
shall not be allowed unless the Minister otherwise directs.
(3) Where taxes are required to be paid in respect of payment for work
done, goods supplied or services rendered, whether under a contract or not,
the head of the department concerned shall be responsible to ensure that any
tax is paid.
Payment for contracts
17. (1) Subject to the Loans Act, 1970 (Act 335). a contract that provides
for the payment of any money by the government shall not be considered
valid without the prior approval of the Minister.
(2) The Minister shall signify approval, on the basis ofa signed certificate
to the effect that there is sufficient unencumbered balance available out of any
appropriation or out of an item included in the estimates, to discharge any
commitments under the contract that would come in the course of payment.
during the financial year in which the contract was entered into.
(3) In the case of forward commitments, the certificate shall slate that
if and when the government grants an appropriation, the commitments will be
entered as an encumbrance against the appropriation.
(4) Copies of each contract made under this section shall be submitted
to the Auditor-General and to the Controller and Accountant-General as soon
as it is made.
Government contracts
18. (1) Subject to the provisions of the State Properly and Contracts Act,
1960 (C.A. 6), the Minister with the prior approval of Parliament may by
legislative instrument make Regulations with respect to the following:
11

Act 654
Financial Administration Act, 2003
(a) the conditions under which contracts may be entered into: and
(b) the security to be given in the name of the Government to
secure the due performance of contracts and may direct in the
Regulations or the order that no contract shall be entered into or
have effect unless execution of the contract has been approved
by Parliament where payments are required in excess of the
prescribed amount.
(2) Where payment under a contract is withheld to ensure the due
performance of the contract, the payment may be charged to the appropriation
for the contract and the amount charged may be credited to a special account
to be paid out in the manner prescribed by the contract.
Modalities for making payments out of the Consolidated Fund
19. (1) There shall be opened, under the authority of the Controller and
Accountant-General and in accordance with section 3, special bank accounts
for each department into which shall be lodged departmental allocations
under an Appropriation Act.
(2) Except otherwise determined by the Minister, special bank accounts
shall be opened with the Bank of Ghana and the balance al any time shall
form pail of the Consolidated Fund.
(3) Subject to Article 178 of the Constitution, every payment out of
the special bank account relating to an appropriation shall be made under the
direction and control of the head of the department concerned, either by cash,
cheque or other instrument in such form and authenticated in such manner as
the Minister may by legislative instrument prescribe.
(4) Every head of department shall ensure that a record is kept of
cheques or other instruments issued under the direction of that department.
(5) The Minister may, in consultation with the Auditor-General by
legislative instrument provide for the destruction of cheques or other negotiable
instruments.
Balance of appropriation
20. (1) The balance of an appropriation made for a financial year that
remains unexpended at the end of the financial year shall lapse and subordinate
authorities made under the appropriation shall lapse with it.
(2) Every head of department shall prepare and submit to the Minister
a statement of the commitments entered into but undischarged be fore the end
of the financial year in which they were incurred.
12

Financial Administration Act, 2003 Act 654
(3) The Minister may by legislative instrument determine the time limits
for the submission of a statement of undischarged commitments.
(4) If the Minister is satisfied that the undischarged commitments may
be properly carried forward and that unexpended balances of the previous
year’s appropriation are available to finance their discharge, the Minister may
issue a warrant to be known as the revote warrant to provide for their due
discharge.
(5) The moneys specified in the revote warrant shall, as soon as possible
after that, be included in the first supplementary estimates of the new finan­
cial year to be presented for the approval of the Parliament.
Investment of public moneys in securities
21. (1) The Minister may cause public moneys to be invested on behalf of
the Government in the purchase of securities for such periods and on such
terms as the Minister thinks fit except that public moneys may not be invested
in government securities.
(2) The interest received in respect of securities shall be paid into the
Consolidated Fund as revenue, except where the securities are held on behalf
of a trust fund and an enactment or agreement requires that the interest shall
be paid into the trust fund.
(3) The Minister may, where it appears expedient, cause the investment
to be sold or converted into money and the proceeds either credited to the
Consolidated Fund or re-invested on behalf of the Government.
(4) Profits and losses realised on the sale of securities shall be charged
to revenue or expenditure, except where the securities are held on behalf of a
trust fund and an enactment or agreement provides that the profits or losses
shall be chargeable to that fund.
(5) At least once in every year, the Auditor-General shall inspect
certificates in respect of the securities and other investments.
(6) The annual return of securities and other investments shall be
prepared by the Controller and Accountant-General and forwarded for
verification to the Auditor-General.
(7) The investment of the funds shall not constitute a withdrawal from
the Consolidated Fund as defined in this Act.
Advances from the Consolidated Fund
22. (1) Subject to Article 181 of the Constitution, no public moneys shall
be advanced from the Consolidated Fund except under authority of Regulations
made by the Minister and approved by Parliament.

Act 654 Financial Administration Act, 2003
(2) Such Regulations shall specify the terms of release and repayment
of advances and require the completion of agreements between the government
and the borrowers as a condition for release.
(3) Parliament may require that interest be payable in respect of the
advances and shall determine the rate to be paid.
(4) The Controller and Accountant-General may recover an advance
or any portion of it that is not repaid or accounted for. as required by Regula­
tions or by agreement out of any moneys payable by the Government to the
person to whom the advance was made.
(5) Each accountable advance that is not repaid or accounted for as
required by subsection (4) shall be reported in the public accounts.
(6) The Minister shall, when annual estimates are being submitted for
the approval of Parliament, include for approval, schedules showing the
amounts by which it is proposed that advances shall be increased or diminished
in the ensuing financial year and shall seek the prior approval of Parliament
for any subsequent revision of the limits set by it.
Loans from the Consolidated Fund
23. (1) Subject to Article 181 of the Constitution, the President may with
the approval of Parliament, authorise the Minister to enter into an agreement
to grant a loan from the Consolidated Fund.
(2) An agreement entered into under subsection (I) shall be laid before
Parliament and shall not come into operation until it has been approved by
Parliament and shall contain a clause to this effect.
(3) Parliament may, by resolution of majority of all the members.
authorise the Minister to approve particular classes of loan subject to such
limitations as may be specified by Parliament.
(4) The Minister shall, when annual estimates are being submitted for
approval by Parliament,
(a) include for approval a schedule of the loans to be payable or
repayments to be recovered during the year; and
Ch) seek the prior approval of Parliament for any additional amounts
that may be required under a general authority to lend, given in
accordance with subsection (3).
(5) The amount issued as loans from the Consolidated Fund shall be
shown in the public accounts as an asset of the Consolidated Fund until
recovery has been effected.
14

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
(6) The interest on loans shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund as
revenue, and recoveries shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
(7) For the purposes of this section the term “loan” means moneys
issued from the Consolidated Fund on condition of return or repayment over
or after a period of more than one year.
Equity investments of the Consolidated Fund
24. (1) The President, with the approval of Parliament, may authorise the
Minister to provide for, acquire by agreement, or purchase from the Consolidated
Fund all or part of the equity capital of a company or other organisation on
grounds of state policy.
(2) The Minister shall, when annual estimates are being submitted for
approval by Parliament, include for approval a schedule for the equity invest­
ments to be made or to be sold or otherwise disposed of during the year.
(3) The amounts issued for provision, acquisition or purchase or equity
investments from the Consolidated Fund shall be shown in the public
accounts as an asset of the Consolidated Fund until the asset has been sold or
otherwise disposed of by authority of Parliament.
(4) The profits and dividends or proceeds of sale arising from the equity
investments shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
(5) A detailed statement of government’s equity investments shall be
reported annually in the annual statement of the public accounts.
Part HI—Revenue and Expenditure
Estimates of revenue and expenditure
25. (1) Subject to Article 179 of the Constitution, the President shall cause
to be prepared and laid before Parliament at least one month before the end of
.f^the financial year, estimates of the revenues and expenditure of the Government
for the following financial year.
(2) The estimates of the expenditure of departments and agencies
(a) shall be classified under programmes or activities which shall
be included in a Bill to be known as the Appropriation Bill and
which shall be introduced into Parliament to provide for the
issue from the Consolidated Fund or such other appropriate fund
of the sums of money necessary to meet that expenditure and
the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified in
that Bill;
15

Act 654
Financial Administration Act, 2003
(b) shall outline for each vote of expenditure a statement of the
performance criteria to be met in providing the required out­
puts; and
(c) shall in respect of payments charged on the Consolidated Fund,
be laid before Parliament for the information of Members of
Parliament.
(3) Parliament shall determine the procedure for the presentation of
Appropriation Bills.
(4) Where, in respect of a financial year, it is found that the amount of
moneys appropriated by the Appropriation Act for any purpose to a government
department is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose
for which no sum of moneys has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary'
estimate showing the sum of money required shall be laid before Parliament
for its approval.
(5) Where in the case of a financial year, a supplementary estimate has
been approved by Parliament in accordance with subsection (4), a supple­
mentary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament in the next
financial year to provide for the appropriation of the sum approved for the
purposes specified in that estimate.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding subsections of
this section, the President may cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament,
estimates of revenue and expenditure in the country for periods covering more
than one year.
(7) This section shall not apply to a department or agency to which
section 6 (2) (b) applies.
Expenditure in advance of appropriation
26. (1) In accordance with Article 180 of the Constitution, where it
appears to the President that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial ; •
year will not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the
President may, with the prior approval of Parliament by a resolution, authorise
the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund to meet expendi­
tures necessary to cany on the services of the Government in respect of the
period expiring three months from the beginning of the financial year or on the
coming into operation of the Act whichever is earlier.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 1 of the Revenue Agencies
(Retention of Part of Revenue) Act, 2002 (Act 628), where the President is
satisfied at the beginning of any financial year that insufficient revenue has 
16

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
been collected by the Revenue Agencies and that revenue determined to be
retained by the Revenue Agencies is inadequate to meet the expenditure to
cany out the functions of the Revenue Agencies, the President may, with the
prior approval of Parliament, authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the
Consolidated Fund to meet the expenditure necessary to carry out the func­
tions of the Revenue Agencies for the period expiring three months from the
beginning of the financial year, but this money shall be refunded to the Con­
solidated Fund before the end of the financial year.
Duration of appropriations and warrants
27. Except for statutory payments, every appropriation by Parliament of
■'oublic moneys for the service of a financial year and every warrant or other
authority issued under this Act in respect of the financial year shall lapse and
cease to have any effect at the close of that year and the unexpended balance
of any moneys withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund shall be repaid to the
Consolidated Fund.
Tax revenue
28. Tax revenue shall be administered by the revenue agencies in accor­
dance with legislative provisions.
Non-tax revenue
29. (I) The estimates of non-tax revenue of Ministries, departments and
agencies other than those that generate tax revenue, shall be classified in
accordance with directives issued by the Minister.
(2) Ministries, departments and agencies shall prepare annual estimates
for each class of non-tax revenue and shall outline for each revenue classifi­
cation, performance criteria to be met to attain the estimated revenue.
Part IV—Government Stores
Government stores
30. (1) Each government department shall maintain adequate records of
stores and the Minister in consultation with the Public Procurement Board,
established under the Public Procurement Act may make Regulations governing
the acquisition, receipt, custody, control, issue and disposal of the stores.
(2) Except as determined by the Minister and subject to any other
enactment, government stores shall be procured from only Value Added Tax
registered persons.
17

Act 654
Financial Administration Act. 2003
Joint acquisition of stores
31. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, two or more departments
may for the purposes of economy or convenience acquire stores together.
(2) Heads of departments acquiring joint stores shall be responsible
for their respective share of resources committed to the joint stores.
Responsibility for government stores
32. (1) A person is responsible for the proper custody, care and use of
government stores under the control of that person.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a head of department is responsible
for the general management of government stores held within the department
and for the due performance of the duties of subordinate staff in relation to the
government stores.
Procurement of stores
33. Procurement of government stores for departments shall be by or under
an enactment of Parliament.
Transfer of Government stores
34. Subject to any other enactment, a transfer, lease, loan or sale of
government stores shall not be made to any person except by or under the
authority of an enactment.
Discharge of accountability for Government stores
35. (1) A head of department is accountable for the government stores
from the time of acquisitions to the time they are of no further use or value to
government.
(2) Accountability is discharged when government stores have been
(a) consumed in the course of public business and records are avail­
able to show that the government stores have been consumed;
(b) worn out in the normal course of public business and deletion "
from the accounts has been approved by the Minister and they
have been disposed of in accordance with the Minister’s directions;
(c) lost, stolen, destroyed, damaged or rendered unserviceable other
than by fair wear and tear, and if deletion from the accounts has
been approved by Parliament.
(3) The Minister may by regulation delegate powers of deletion and
disposal under subsection [2~)(b) to a principal spending officer and the delegated
power shall be personally exercised by the principal spending officer.
18

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
(4) If the Minister is satisfied that the retention of any government
stores is no longer in the public interest. the Minister may authorise disposal
in accordance with section 30 of this Act subject to any Regulation approved
by Parliament governing the disposal.
(5) Authority for deletion from the accounts in cases that fall within
subsection (2)fc/ rests with the Minister who may by Regulations delegate
powers of deletion to the principal spending officers and the delegated power
shall be personally exercised by the principal spending officer.
(6) Deletions from the accounts under subsection (5) shall be reported
in the annual financial statements of the department concerned in such manner
as Regulations made under this Act may prescribe.
Special enquiry
36. (1) Where the Minister has good reason to believe that a malfeasance
has occurred in connection with government stores, the Minister shall bring
this to the notice of Parliament and the Auditor-General.
(2) Parliament may, request the Auditor-General to enquire into and
report on the matter.
Application of stores
37. Subject to section 34, government stores shall not be applied for any
purpose other than towards the furtherance of the programmes and objectives
of government departments.
Part V—Accounts and audit
Basis of accounts
38. (1) The accounts submitted in accordance with this Part shall state the
basis of accounting used in the preparation of the accounts and identify any
significant departures and the reasons for the departures.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), financial statements shall be prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Classification of accounts
39. The Controller and Accountant-General shall, with reference to the
approved Government Chart of Accounts, determine the classification of accounts.
Monthly statement of public accounts
40. (1) Within a period of fifteen days, or such other period as Parliament
may by resolution appoint, after the end of each month, there shall be prepared
and transmitted to the Auditor-General and the Minister by the Controller and
Accountant-General in respect of the month, the public accounts which shall
be published in the Gazette and shall comprise
19

Act 654 Financial Administration Act, 2003
(a) a balance sheet showing the assets and liabilities of the
Consolidated Fund as al the end of the month;
(b) a statement of revenue and expenditure ofthe Consolidated Fund
for the month;
(c) cash flow statement ofthe Consolidated Fund for the month;
and
(d) notes that form a part of the accounts.
(2) The accounts submitted under this section shall
(a) be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles and in accordance with any instructions issued by the
Controller and Accountant-General in consultation with the
Auditor-General; and
(b) state the basis of accounting used in the preparation and identify
any significant departures and the reasons for the departure.
(3) The Controller and Accountant-General shall prescribe, in
Departmental Accounting Instructions, which items are to be classified as the
assets and liabilities of the public accounts.
(4) Subject to subsection (3), the Controller and Accountant-General
shall maintain a composite record of public property classified as assets and
forthis section, departments shall include schedules of their assets in the notes
to their respective accounts required under section 41.
Annual statement of accounts
41. (1) Within a period of three months, or such other period as Parliament
may by resolution appoint, after the end of each financial year, there shall be
prepared by the
(a) head of each department and transmitted to the Auditor-General,
the Minister and the Controller and Accountant-General in
respect ofthe financial year, accounts of the department which
shall comprise
(i) a balance sheet showing the assets and liabilities ofthe
departments as at the end of the year;
(ii) a statement of revenue and expenditure of the depart­
ment for the year;
(iii) a cash flow statement of the department for the year; and
(iv) notes that form part ofthe accounts which shall include
particulars of the extent to which the performance criteria
specified in the estimate in relation to the provision of
the department’s output were satisfied.
20

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
(b) Controller and Accountant-General and transmitted to the
Auditor-General and Minister in Respect of the financial year,
the public accounts which shall comprise
(i) a balance sheet showing the assets and liabilities of the
Consolidated Fund as at the end of the year;
(ii) a statement of revenue and expenditure of the Consoli­
dated Fund for the year;
(iii) a cash flow statement of the Consolidated Fund for the
year; and
(iv) notes that form part of the accounts.
(2) The accounts submitted under this section shall
/—s (a) be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles and in accordance with any instructions issued by the
Controller and Accountant-General in consultation with the
Auditor-General; and
(b) state the basis of accounting used in their preparation and
identify any significant departures and the reasons for the
departures.
(3) The Controller and Accountant-General shall prescribe in
Departmental Accounting Instructions, which items are to be classified as^
assets and liabilities of the public accounts and the departmental accounts.
(4) Without limiting this section, the Controller & Accountant-General
may prescribe for inclusion in the Departmental Accounting Instructions of
each department the content of information to be included in the notes
required under subsection (1 )fkz>(iv) and 1 (b)(\v).
Closure of accounts
42. (1) At the close of business of the last working day of each month or
financial year, whichever is applicable, the accounts shall be balanced off.
(2) The receipts and payments that belong to a period or a financial
year other than the period or financial year in question, shall be shown in the
accounts and the details shall be given in the notes in accordance with
sections 39 and 40.
i
( Financial year
43. The financial year of Government shall extend from the first day of
January until the thirty-first day of December in each year.
21
III

Act 654
Financial Administration Act, 2003
Audit of accounts
44. (1) The public accounts, accounts of departments and statutory corpo­
rations and other public institutions provided for by this Act shall be audited
in accordance with the provisions of the Audit Service Act. 2000, (Act 584)
and Regulations made under that Act.
(2) The internal audit of departments and statutory corporations and
other public institutions provided for by this Act shall be conducted in accor­
dance with any enactment for the time being regulating internal auditing of
departments, statutory corporations and public institutions.
Part VI—Statutory Corporations and other Public
Institutions
Application of this Part
45. (1) This Part of the Act applies to statutory corporations and other
public institutions other than those set up for commercial purposes unless other­
wise expressly provided in the enactment establishing the corporation or other
public institution.
(2) Any reference in the following provisions of this Part to a "corporation”
shall be construed as a reference to a “statutory corporation”, or “other public
institution” referred to in subsection (T).
Financial year of corporation
46. The financial year of a corporation shall be the same as the financial
year of the Government.
Funds of a corporation
47. The funds of a corporation include
(a) money that may be provided by Parliament for the corporation;
(b) loans granted to the corporation; and
(c) moneys accruing to the corporation in the exercise and perform­
ance of its functions.
Bank accounts
48. A corporation may, with the approval of the Minister maintain in its
own name, one or more accounts in such bank in the country as the Minister
may approve.
Special accounts with Government
49. (1) Funds of a corporation may be placed to the credit of a special
account in the Consolidated Fund in the name of the corporation if the Minister
and the sector Minister approve, subject to the enactment under which the
corporation exists.
22

Financial Administration Act, 2003 Act 654
(2) The Minister may pay out or repay to the corporation the money in
the special account.
(3) Interest may be allowed and paid From the Consolidated Fund to
the credit of a special account at rates determined by the Minister.
Payment over of surplus money
50. (1) A corporation shall pay to the Government such money administered
by.it as the sector Minister and the Minister consider to be in excess of the
amount required for the purposes of the corporation.
(2) Any money paid may be applied towards the discharge of an
obligation of the corporation to the Government or may be applied as state
revenue.
Investments of moneys
51. (1) A corporation may invest the moneys of the corporation in such
manner as the Minister may approve and in consultation with the Minister
may reinvest any of its investments.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a corporation shall not invest its
money in government securities.
Award of contracts
52. The Minister may make Regulations or issue instructions on the conditions
upon which a corporation may undertake contractual commitments.
Reserves
53. The Minister may upon recommendation of the governing body of a
corporation direct the corporation to make provision for reserves, for extensions,
depreciation of assets, for uncollectable debts and for other purposes.
Books, accounts and audit
54. (1) A corporation shall keep proper books of accounts and proper
records in relation to them and the books of accounts and records shall be in
such form as the Auditor-General may approve.
(2) The financial statements of a corporation comprising
(a) a balance sheet of the assets and liabilities of the corporation as
at the end of the year;
(b) a statement of revenue and expenditure of the corporation for
the year;
(c) the cash flow statement of the corporation for the year; and
23

Act 654
Financial Administration Act, 2003
(d) notes that form part of the accounts which shall include particulars
of the extent to which the performance criteria specified in the
estimate in relation to the corporations outputs were satisfied,
shall be prepared within a period of three months after the end of each financial
year.
(3) The financial statement shall be prepared and transmitted to the
Auditor-General, the Minister and the sector Minister by the head of the
corporation.
(4) The accounts submitted under this section shall
(a) be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles and in accordance with any instructions issued by the
Auditor-General; and
(b) state the basis of accounting used in preparation and identify''^
significant departures from the principles and the reasons for
the departure.
(5) The Minister, the sector Minister or head of department shall prepare
a report in the prescribed form and manner for Parliament, or the sector
Minister.
(6) The report under subsection (5) shall be directed by Parliament.
(7) The Auditor-General shall audit accounts of public corporations
governed by this Act in accordance with the provisions of the Audit Service
Act, 2000 (Act 584).
Annual report
55. (1) The board of directors of a corporation shall, as soon as possible
after the expiry of each financial year but within six months after the end of
the financial year, submit an annual report to the sector Minister dealing generally
with the activities and operations of the corporation within that year.
(2) The annual report shall include
(a) a copy of the audited accounts of the corporation together with
the Auditor-General’s report on them;
(b) a statement of any directions given by the sector Minister to the
Board within that year in accordance with this Act and the
enactment under which the corporation exists; and
(c) such other information as the sector Minister may in writing
reasonably request.
(3) A copy of the annual report of the Board of Directors of a corporation
shall also be sent by the Board to
24

Financial Administration Act, 2003 Act 654
that the person has, in the course of employment received moneys that belong
to the Government and refused or neglected to pay over the moneys to the
proper persons at the proper limes, an affidavit deposing to these facts made
by any person who has knowledge of the matter shall in any proceedings for
the recovery of the moneys be received in evidence and be prima facie evidence
of the facts stated.
(5) Where any sum of money is lost to the Government by misconduct.
neglect of duty or negligence by any person employed in the collection or
receiving of any public moneys, the person is accountable for the sum. as if
the person had collected and received it and it may be recovered from that
person as if he collected and received it.
(6) The provisions of this section shall apply with modification to
government stores or the value of (he stores where appropriate as they apply
to government moneys.
Offences
62. (1) Each officer or person acting in an office or employment connected
with the collection, management or disbursement of public or trust moneys or
with the control of government stores who
(a) accepts or receives money or valuable consideration for the per­
formance of official duties;
(b) conspires with another person to defraud the Government, or
makes opportunity for another person to defraud the Government;
(c) deliberately permits the contravention of the law by another
person;
(d) wilfully makes or signs a false entry in a book or wilfully makes
or signs a false certificate or return in any case in which it is a
duty of the person to make an entry, certificate or return;
(e) having knowledge or information of the contravention of financial
legislation by any person, or fraud committed by any person
against the Government under legislation relating to public
finance fails to report the knowledge or information to the person's
senior officer or any state security agency; or
(j) demands or accepts or attempts to collect, directly or indirectly.
as payments of gifts or otherwise, any sum of money, or other
thing of value, for the compromise, adjustment or settlement of
a charge or complaint for a contravention or alleged contravention
of legislation relating to public finance,
27

Act 654 Financial Administration Act, 2003
commits an offence, and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
5000 penalty units or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years or to
both.
(2) Any person who
(a) promises, offers or gives any money or other valuable consid­
eration to any officer or person acting in an office or employment
connected with the collection, management or disbursement of
public or trust moneys or the control of government stores with
intent
(i) to influence a decision or action on any question or
matter that is then pending, or may, by law. be brought
before the person in an official capacity; or
(ii) to influence the officer or person to commit, or aid and^*x
abet in committing any fraud on the government or to
connive at. take part in. or allow any opportunity for the
commission of the fraud; or
(b) accepts or receives money or valuable consideration,
commits an offence, and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
three times the amount so offered or accepted, or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 5 years or to both.
(3) Where any person is required to perform any function or duty under
this Act and that person fails to perform that duly within the time required, the
person shall be liable to such punishment as may be prescribed in Regulations
made under this Act.
Government property
63. (1) Books, papers, accounts and documents kept or used by, or
received or taken into the possession of any person, who is or has been
employed in the collection or management of revenue by virtue of that
employment, is property that belongs to Government.
(2) The moneys and valuable securities received or taken into the' J
possession of an officer or a person in the cause of employment is money and
valuable securities that belong to the Government.
Deduction from money due by the Government
64. (1) Where a person is indebted to the Government for a specific sum
of money, the Minister in consultation with the Attorney-General may authorise
the retention, by way of deduction or set-off, of the amount of the indebtedness
out of any sum of money that may be due or payable by the Government to
that person.
28

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Controller and Accountant-
General or another head of department shall recover an overpayment made
out of the Consolidated Fund on account of salary, wages and allowances out
of a sum of money that may be due or payable by the Government to the
person to whom the overpayment was made.
(3) No payment shall be made where an amount of more than 1.000
currency points is due from the Consolidated Fund to any individual or body
of persons unless there is produced to the paying officer a certificate issued by
the Commissioner of Income Tax showing that tax is not due from the
individual or body of persons or that satisfactory arrangements have been
made for payment of any tax due by the individual or body.
(4) Currency point under subsection (3) has the meaning assigned to it
( under section 165(2) of the Internal Revenue Act, 2000 (Act 592).
Transfer of Government property
65. No transfer, lease or loan of property owned by the Government shall
be made to any person except in accordance with the appropriate law for the
time being in force for the purpose.
Part VIII—Establishment of Financial Administration
Tribunal
Establishment of Tribunal
66. (1) There is established by this Act a Financial Administration Tribu­
nal referred to in this Act as the "Tribunal”.
(2) The Tribunal shall comprise,
(a) a Justice of the High Court who shall be the chairperson;
(b) a chartered accountant; and
(c) a management accountant or a professional valuer.
(3) The members shall be nominated by the Chief Justice in consulta­
tion with the Judicial Council and shall be appointed by the President.
' (4) The terms and conditions of the members other than the Justice of
the High Court shall be as stated in their letters of appointment.
Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
67. The Tribunal has jurisdiction
(a) to hear and determine matters that fall for determination under
this Act;
(b) to enforce recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
on the Auditor-GeneraFs reports as approved by Parliament;
(c) to enforce contracts and bonds entered into in pursuance of this
Act;
29

Act 654 Financial Administration Act, 2003
(d) to make such orders as it considers appropriate for the recovery
of monies, assets or other property due to the State;
(e) to prohibit any individual whether a public officer or not from
managing public accounts or funds if the individual is unquali­
fied professionally or has been persistently negligent in the man­
agement of public funds;
(D to prohibit any person from participating as a bidder in any
government procurement or contract where the person has a
record of defrauding the State.
Enforcement of the orders of the Tribunal
68. The Orders of the Tribunal shall be enforced in the same manner as an
order of the High Court.
Compensation and reparation
69. (1) A person adversely affected by an audit report may accept liability
and offer to pay compensation or make restitution.
(2) Unless there is objection to the offer of compensation or restitution
from the Attorney-General, the Tribunal shall accept the offer if it considers
the offer satisfactory and may make such orders as it considers appropriate.
(3) An order made under subsection (2) shall not be taken as a conviction.
(4) Where a person ordered to pay compensation or make restitution
under this section fails or defaults in the payment of any money ordered by the
Tribunal, the Tribunal shall
(a) make an order for the confiscation to the state and sale of assets
owned by the person sufficient to satisfy the debt and
(b) ban the person from participation on any government contract,
procurement or any transaction funded from public funds.
(5) For the purpose of identifying the assets owned by any person under
subsection (4) (a), the Tribunal shall, where it is of the opinion that the assets/"?-
of the person has been deliberately vested in any other person for the benefit
of the first mentioned person or that first mentioned person’s family, order the
tracing of the assets to satisfy the debt owed to the State.
(6) An order requiring the refund of any money to the State may include
payment of interest.
Appeal
70. An appeal from an order or a decision of the Tribunal lies to the Court
of Appeal and then to the Supreme Court.
30

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
Right of the Attorney-General to Order Prosecution
71. Nothing in this Part shall preclude the Attorney-General from instituting
criminal prosecution even where monies lost to the state have been recovered.
Part IX—Miscellaneous
Government appointee reporting obligations
72. (1) Directors of companies appointed by the Government shall submit
a report on the operations of the company to the Minister and the sector Minister
at the end of June and December each year.
(2) The Directors appointed by the Government in any company shall
forward to the sector Minister a copy of the audited financial statement of the
company within a period of one month after the publication of the audited
financial statement of the company.
(3) Subject to any other provision on the removal of Directors from a
Board, where the Directors fail to comply with subsection (1), the Directors
shall be removed from the Board.
(4) The Minister shall determine the form and content of the report
required under subsection (1).
Regulations
73. The Minister may, subject to the provisions of this Act by legislative
instrument make Regulations on
(a) the collection, management and administration of. and the
accounting for public moneys and moneys held in trust for the
Government;
(b) payments and procedure for payment out of the Consolidated
Fund;
(c) loans from the Consolidated Fund;
(d) appropriation of public money;
(e) the maintenance of records of the property of Government;
(f) any purpose necessary for the efficient administration of public
finance subject to the provisions of any enactment; and
(g) anything which is required or authorised to be made by Regulations
under this Act.
Interpretation
74. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
“accountable” means the requirement to record, report, explain and 

Act 654
Financial Administration Act, 2003
justify actions to a superior officer, to the Government, to
Parliament, the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament or
to the public;
“agency of Government” means a Ministry. Department, non-Profit
making statutory body or any other agency of Government;
“Auditor-General” means the person appointed as such under the
Constitution of the Republic of Ghana;
“appropriation” means any moneys charged on the Consolidated
Fund or any other public fund;
“Chief Director” means the Chief Director of the Ministry of
Finance:
“Appropriation Act” means an Act to apply a sum out of the
Consolidated Fund to the service of a financial year;
“Consolidated Fund” means the Consolidated Fund of the Republic
of Ghana;
“Controller and Accountant-General” means the person appointed
by the President by or under the authority of this enactment or
any officer acting on the authority of the Controller and
Accountant-General;
“department” includes Ministries or other agencies of Government;
“generally accepted accounting principles” means accounting
principles, practices and procedures recognized by the Institute
of Chartered Accountants of Ghana as appropriate for reporting
financial information relating to government, a ministry or
department, fund, agency or other reporting unit being principles.
practices and procedures that are consistent with this Act and
any relevant Appropriation Act;
“Government” means the Government of the Republic of Ghana;
“Government Accounts” means all documents on records pertain­
ing to the collection of revenue, the control of expenditure, the
administration of trust fund, the management of government
stores, and such other financial duties as may be made the
responsibility of Government departments.
“head of department” has the same meaning assigned to it by or
under.the Civil Service Law, 1993 (P.N.D.C.L. 327) or other
public institution;
32

Financial Administration Act, 2003
Act 654
■‘internally generated funds” means revenue generated from the
activities of a government agency from its operations other than
taxes collected by the Revenue Agencies and includes non-tax
revenues;
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for Finance or any
person designated to act on behalf of the Minister;
“money” means any coin, note or negotiable instrument;
“money received by or on behalf of the Government for a special
purpose” includes moneys that are paid to a public officer under
or pursuant to an enactment, trust, undertaking or contract and
which are to be disbursed for a purpose specified in or pursuant
to the enactment, trust, treaty, undertaking or contract;
“negotiable instrument” includes cheque, draft, traveler's cheques,
bill of exchange, money order, postal remittance and any other
similar instrument:
“non-tax revenue” means revenue accruing to an agency of government
other than revenue generated by the agency from its operations
which are not taxes collected by the Revenue Agenc ies;
“Principal Account Holder” means the sector Minister or political
head of Ministry, Department or Agency governed by this law;
“public accounts” means all documents and records pertaining to
public and trust moneys received into, held in and paid from the
Consolidated fund”;
“public institution” includes a corporation and "statutory corporation”;
“Principal Spending Officer” means the Chief Director, Chief
Executive or the most senior Administrative Head of a Ministry.
department or agency responsible for producing outputs;
“public service” includes service in any civil capacity of the
Government, the emoluments attached to which are paid
directly out of moneys provided by Government and service with
any statutory corporation established entirely out of public funds
or moneys provided by Government;
“securities” include securities of the Government or of any other
country approved by the Minister and bonds, notes, deposits,
certificates, debentures, treasury bills; and
“tax” includes any tax. import and export duty or toll payable to the
Government, imposed or authorised to be imposed by an enactment.
33

Act 654 Financial Administration Act, 2003
Repeals, savings and modifications
75. (1) The Financial Administration Decree, 1979 (S.M.C.D. 221) is
hereby repealed.
(2) Regulations, orders, rules and instructions relating to the adminis­
tration of public finance, government stores and public corporations other
than those set up for commercial purposes in operation at the time of the
commencement of this Act and not inconsistent with this Act shall continue
in operation until the regulations, orders, rules or instructions are amended,
revoked or replaced by regulations or orders or other instrument under this Act.
(3) Any enactment in force at the commencement of this Act shall
have effect, with such modification as may be necessary, to give effect to the
provisions of this Act.
(4) The Minister may issue written instructions with respect to transi­
tional measures related to the implementation of this Act.
Commencement
76. This Act shall come into force for the financial year commencing 1st
January. 2004.
Date of Gazelle notification: 3 1st.October, 2003.
GOVERNMENT PRINTER. ASSEMBLY PRESS, ACCRA. GPC7A688/300/8/2003