Public Financial Management Act, 2016
1
  Act  921
ARRANGEMENT  OF  SECTIONS
Section
Preliminary Provisions
  1.   Object of this Act
  2.   Application
Responsibilities and Roles for Public Financial Management
  3.   General  responsibility
  4.   Responsibilities  of  Minister
  5.   Powers  of   Minister
    6.   Responsibilities  of  Chief  Director
  7.  Duties of a Principal Spending Officer
  8.   Controller and Accountant-General
  9.   Deputy Controller and Accountant-General
10.   Budget Office
11.   Oversight  of  Parliament
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Policies
12.   Application of sections 13 to 17
13.   Fiscal policy principles
14.   Fiscal policy objectives
15.   Fiscal Strategy Document
16.   Fiscal  policy  indicators
17.   Cabinet to adhere to targets in Fiscal Strategy Document
18.   Suspension of rules or targets
Budget  Preparation,  Approval  and  Management
19.   Salary negotiations for public sector
20.   Guidelines  for  preparation  of  annual  budget
21.   Annual budget
22.   Approval of annual budget by Parliament
23.   Expenditure  in  advance  of  appropriation
24.   Budgeting on a gross basis
25.   Commitment  of  approved  budget
26.   Expiry  of  appropriation
27.   Performance  Report
28.   Mid-year  review
PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2016

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
2
Act  921
29.   Re-allocation of funds from a covered entity
30.   Budget  implementation  by  Principal  Spending  Officers
31.   Cash flow forecast
32.   Virement
33.   Multi-year  expenditure  commitments
34.   Submission  of  quarterly    reports  on  budget  implementation
35.   Supplementary  budget
Contingency Fund
36.   Contingency Fund payments and advancements
Sinking Fund and Debt Servicing
37.   Creation  of  Sinking  Fund
38.   Sources of money for the Sinking Fund
39.   Administration  of  the  Sinking  Fund
40.   Bank  account  of  Sinking  Fund
41.   Payment  from  Sinking  Fund
42.   Accounts and audit
43.   Annual report and other reports
44.   Transfer of  money
Cash  and  Asset  Management
45.   Management and use of Government moneys
46.   Treasury Single Account
47.   Collection,  deposit  and  retention  of  Government  revenue
48.   Consolidated  Fund
49.   Investment of  balances on the Consolidated Fund
50.   Spending  from  the  Consolidated  Fund
51.   Bank account management
52.   Custody  and  management  of  assets
53.   Abandonment  of  claims  and  write  off  of  public  funds
Public Debt Management
54.   Functions of the Public Debt Management Office
55.   Government borrowing and debt management
56.   Approval  of  Parliament  of  terms  and  conditions  of  government
borrowings
57.   Borrowing  purposes
PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2016

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
3
  Act  921
58.   Debt management objectives
59.   Debt management strategy
60.   Annual borrowing and recovery plan
61.   Issuance of government debt securities in the domestic debt market
62.   Issuance of government debt securities abroad
63.   Borrowing  from  banks  and  other  financial  institutions
64.   Other  market  transactions
65.   Status  of  Government  debt
66.   Government  guarantees
67.   Government  lending
68.   Supplier’s credit agreements entered into by Government
69.   Finance lease agreements entered into by Government
70.   Record of government debt and finance arrangements
71.   Publication  of  government  debt  and  finance  arrangements
72.   Annual report to Parliament
73.   Borrowing  by  local  government  authorities,  public  corporations
and state-owned enterprises
74.   Borrowing by local government authorities
75.   Reporting  requirements  of  local  government  authorities
76.   Borrowing by public corporations and state-owned enterprises
77.   Reporting  requirements  of  public  corporations  and  state-owned
enterprises
78.   Power  to  appoint  agents
Accounts  and  Audit
79.   Submission  of  financial  statements
80.   Annual accounts
81.   Consolidated  annual  accounts
82.   Changes to accounting or classification system
83.   Internal  audit
84.   External  audit
85.   Report  on  findings  and  recommendations
Audit  Committees
86.   Establishment  of  Audit  Committee
87.   Composition  of  Audit  Committee
PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2016

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
4
Act  921
88.   Functions  of  Audit  Committee
89.   Submission  of  consolidated  audit  accounts  of  local  government
authorities
90.   Duty  of  governing  body  of  public  corporation  and  state-owned
enterprise
91.   Collection and receipt of moneys due to public corporations
92.   Removal  of  directors  of  a  public  corporation
93.   Annual  financial  plan  of  public  corporations  and  state-owned
enterprises
94.   Financial directives to public corporations and state-owned enter-
prises
95.   Accounts and audit of public corporations and state-owned enter-
prises
Miscellaneous Provisions
  96.   Offences and penalties
  97.   Surcharge
  98.   Penalty for contravetion of  this Act
  99.   Waiver  of   sovereign  immunity
100.   Fiscal impact analysis of legislation and proposals
101.   Regulations
102.Interpretation
103.   Repeals and savings
104.   Transitional  provisions
SCHEDULE
PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2016

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
5
  Act  921
ACT
OF  THE  PARLIAMENT  OF  THE  REPUBLIC  OF  GHANA
ENTITLED
PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2016
AN Act to regulate the financial management of the public sector within
a  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  framework;  to  define  responsibilities
of  persons  entrusted  with  the  management  and  control  of  public
funds,  assets,  liabilities  and  resources,  to  ensure  that  public  funds
are sustainable and consistent with the level of public debt; to provide
for accounting and audit of public funds and to provide for related
matters.
PASSED by Parliament and assented to by the President:
Preliminary Provisions
Object of this Act
1.(1)  The object of this Act is to regulate the financial management
of the public sector within a macroeconomic and fiscal framework.
(2)  For the purpose of  subsection (1), there shall be established
(a)a  framework  to  support  a  sound  fiscal  policy  and  the
macroeconomic  management  of  public  funds;
DATE OF ASSENT:  25th August, 2016.
REPUBLIC  OF  GHANA
THE  NINE  HUNDRED  AND  TWENTY-FIRST

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
6
Act  921
(b)processes for  the  preparation,  approval  and management
of a  transparent, credible and predictable annual budget;
(c)mechanisms  for  the  operation  of  the  Consolidated  Fund;
(d)mechanisms for the management of  public funds, assets and
liabilities;
(e)internal  and  external  audit  frameworks  and  correlative
reporting  and  accounting  systems;  and
(f)a  mechanism  to  oversee  the  matters  specified  under  para-
graphs (a)  to  (e).
Application
2.(1)  This Act applies to
(a)a covered entity;  and
(b)a public officer responsible for receiving, using, or managing
public  funds.
(2)  This  Act  shall  be  read  together  with  any  other  enactment
relevant to public financial management.
(3)  Where  there  is  a  conflict  or  inconsistency  between  the  provi-
sions of this Act and any other relevant enactment, the provisions of this
Act shall prevail.
Responsibilities and Roles for Public Financial Management
General responsibility
3.  The Minister, Chief  Director, Controller and Accountant-General,
a Principal Account Holder, a Principal Spending Officer and any other
public  officer  designated  by  the  Minister  to  manage  public  funds  shall
discharge  their  respective  responsibilities  and  exercise  their  powers  in
accordance with this Act and the Regulations.
Responsibilities of Minister
4.(1)  The Minister is responsible for the policy and strategic matters
related  to  the  efficient  operation  of  the  public  financial  management
system of the country subject to policy guidance from Cabinet.
(2)  For the purpose of  subsection (1) and subject to the Constitu-
tion and any other enactment, the Minister shall
(a)prepare the annual and supplementary budget estimates and
reports  for  submission  to  Parliament;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
7
  Act  921
(b)submit  to  Parliament  for  approval, the  budget  of  covered
entities as required under this Act or any other enactment
to ensure compliance of the covered entities;
(c)monitor  and  assess  the  implementation  of  the  annual
budget  and  ensure  the  implementation  of  the  fiscal  policy
of  Government;
(d)manage  Government  property,  financial  assets,  Govern-
ment  debts,  Government  guarantees  and  other  contingent
liabilities specified under this Act;
(e)account  for  public  funds  through  a  consolidated  public
account;
(f)supervise the financial operations of a covered entity;
(g)prepare Fiscal Strategy Document;
(h)manage  public  funds;
(i)coordinate  and  mobilise  resources  including  financial
assistance  from  development  partners  and  integrate  the
resources  into  the  planning,  budgeting,  reporting  and
accountability processes provided under this Act;
(j)provide  policy  framework  for  conducting  banking  and
management of cash for a covered entity;
(k)issue directives and instructions necessary for the effective
implementation  of  this  Act  or  any  other  enactment  to  the
head  of   a  covered  entity,  a  Principal  Account  Holder  and
Principal  Spending  Officer  of  a  covered  entity;  and
(l)perform  any  other  functions  assigned  to  the  Minister
under this Act.
Powers of Minister
5.(1)  Pursuant to section 4, the Minister may
(a)request a report or any other information from any covered
entity or any other person receiving grants, advances, loans,
guarantees or indemnities from the Government;
(b)in consultation with the Civil Service Council and with the
approval  of   Cabinet,  establish  structures  or  units,  within
the  Ministry  necessary  to  enable  the  Minister  discharge
responsibilities  under  this  Act;
(c)acting on the advice of the Attorney-General and subject to
the approval of Parliament, enter into and execute an agree-
ment on behalf of the Government in relation to matters of
a financial nature; and

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
8
Act  921
(d)give directives and instructions necessary for the implemen-
tation  of  the  provisions  of  this  Act.
(2)  The  Minister  may  delegate  any  of  the  responsibilities  under
subsection  (1)  to  the  Chief  Director  or  to  a  senior  public  officer  not
below the rank of a Director within the Ministry but shall not be relieved
of  the  ultimate  responsibility  for  the  performance  of  the  delegated
responsibility.
(3)  Subject  to  any  procurement  laws,  the  Minister  may  hire  or
retain the services of  professionals, consultants or experts, as the Minister
considers  necessary  for  the  proper  and  effective  performance  of  the
functions of the Minister under this Act, on the terms and conditions to
be agreed upon.
Responsibilities of Chief Director
6.(1)  In addition to the duties assigned under section 20 of the Civil
Service Act, 1993 (PNDCL 327) and responsibilities specified under this
Act relating to a Principal Spending Officer, the Chief  Director shall
(a)advise the Minister on economic, budgetary, and financial
matters  and  on  matters  related  to  the  implementation  of
this Act;
(b)coordinate  the  preparation  of  the
 (i)   Fiscal Strategy Document,
(ii)   budget estimates, and
(iii)the  Appropriation  Bill;
(c)co-ordinate the promotion and enforcement of a transparent,
efficient and effective manangement of
 (i)   public  revenue,
(ii)   public  expenditure,  and
(iii)the assets and liabilities of a covered entity;
(d)monitor  the  performance  of  the  public financial  manage-
ment systems of the public sector;
(e)monitor the financial and related performance of a covered
entity;  and
(f)prepare  a  report  within  one  month    after  the  end  of  each
quarter  on the implementation of the annual budget by the
Government and submit the report to the Minister.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
9
  Act  921
(2)  For purposes of  subsection (1), the Chief  Director
(a)shall through the Controller and Accountant-General have
access, during working hours, to
(i)the accounting records or information of a covered
entity,
(ii)the place where public accounting services are carried
out,  and
(iii)the place where public accounting records are kept;
and
(b)may  inspect,  during  working    hours,  the  offices  of   a
covered  entity  and  access  any  information  relating  to
public finance that the Chief Director may request.
(3)  The Chief  Director may, under paragraph (b) of  subsection (2),
authorise a public officer to inspect the offices of  a covered entity.
(4)  The Chief  Director may, in writing, delegate any of  the respon-
sibilities under this section to a senior public officer of the Ministry but
shall not be relieved of the ultimate responsibility for the discharge of the
delegated  responsibility.
Duties of a Principal Spending Officer
7.(1)  A Principal Spending Officer of a covered entity shall
(a)ensure  the  regularity  and  proper  use  of  money  appropri-
ated in that covered entity;
(b)authorise  commitments  for  the  covered  entity  within  a
ceiling set by the Minister under section 25; and
(c)manage  the  resources  received,  held  or  disposed  of  by  or
on account of  the covered entity.
  (2)  A  Principal  Spending  Officer  shall,  in  the  exercise  of  duties
under this Act, establish an effective system of risk management, internal
control and internal audit in respect of the resources and transactions of
a covered entity.
  (3)  Where  a  Principal  Spending  Officer  receives  a  subvention  on
behalf  of  another entity, that Principal Spending Officer shall remit the
subvention  to  that  other  entity  in  accordance  with  the  approved  cash
flow plan for the subvention.
(4)  A  Principal  Spending  Officer  may  delegate  a  function  or
responsibility  specified  in  this  Act  to  a  public  officer  who  is  under  the

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
10
Act  921
control of that Principal Spending Officer but shall not be relieved of the
ultimate responsibility for the performance of the delegated function or
responsibility.
  (5)
Where  a  Principal  Spending  Officer  delegates  a  function  or
responsibility under subsection (4), that Principal Spending Officer shall
give  the  directives  necessary  for  the  proper  exercise  or  performance  of
that  function  or  responsibility.
Controller and Accountant-General
8.(1)  The  President  shall,  in  accordance  with  article  195  of  the
Constitution,  appoint  a  Controller  and  Accountant-General  who  shall
be the Chief Accounting Officer of the Government and the chief advisor
to the Minister and Government in matters relating to accountancy.
(2)  The  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  a  Controller  and
Accountant-General  shall  be  specified  in  the  letter  of  appointment  and
shall  be  appointed  for  a  term  of  four  years  which  may  be  renewed  for
another  term  of  four  years.
(3)  The Controller and Accountant-General shall be responsible to
the Minister for the custody, safety and integrity of  public funds.
(4)   The Controller and Accountant-General shall
(a)compile and manage  the accounts prepared in relation to
public  funds;
(b)issue  general  instructions  to  a  Principal  Spending  Officer
in accordance with this Act and the Regulations;
(c)keep,  render  and  publish  statements  on  public  accounts
under this Act;
(d)develop efficient accounting systems for a covered entity;
(e)approve  accounting  instructions  of  a  covered  entity;
(f)receive,  disburse  and  provide  secure  custody  for  public
funds;
(g)on  the  instructions  of   the  Minister,  open  an  account  with
the Bank of Ghana and its agents necessary for the deposit
of   public  funds  subject  to  compliance  with  the  Treasury
Single Account system established under section 46;
(h)authorise the opening of an account for a covered entity;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
11
  Act  921
(i)in  consultation  with  the  Auditor-General,  specify  for  a
covered  entity,  the  accounting  standards,  policies  and  the
classification system to be applied in public accounting to
ensure that a proper system of accounting operates;
(j)provide accounting officers to covered entities; and
(k)be  responsible  for  the  classification  and  management  of
value books.
Deputy Controller and Accountant-General
9.(1)  The  President  shall,  in  accordance  with  article  195  of  the
Constitution,  appoint  Deputy  Controllers  and  Accountants-General.
(2)  A  Deputy  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall  perform
functions assigned by the Controller and Accountant-General.
Budget Office
10.(1)  The Ministry shall have an office known as the Budget Office.
 (2)  The Budget Office shall be responsible for
(a)the preparation of  the annual estimates and Medium-Term
Expenditure  Framework  within  the  constraints  specified
in the Government’s Fiscal Strategy Document;
(b)the  preparation  of  the  mid-year  review  and  half-yearly
budget implementation reports under sections 28 and 34;
(c)advising  the  Minister  through  the  Chief  Director  on  all
matters related to the annual budget, supplementary  budget
and  the  Medium  Term  Expenditure  Framework;
(d)advising  the  Chief  Director  on  matters    related  to  the
classification  of  the  budget  and  systems  required  to  prepare
the budget; and
(e)perform any other function assigned by the Chief  Director.
Oversight of Parliament
11.(1)  Subject to the Constitution, Parliament shall provide oversight
in  respect  of
(a)matters relating to budget and finance;
(b)government  expenditure;
(c)performance  reporting;
(d)post-legislative  scrutiny;  and
(e)impact of  financial policy measures on the economy.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
12
Act  921
(2)  The  Speaker  of  Parliament  may  assign  responsibilities  under
subsection  (1)  to  a  committee  of  Parliament  or  an  office  established  by
Parliament  for  that  purpose.
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Policies
Application of sections 13 to 17
12.(1)  The  provisions  of  sections  13  to  17  apply  to  the  central
Government.
(2)  The Minister may, by legislative instrument, extend the appli-
cation  of  sections  13  to  17  to  local  government  authorities  and  public
corporations.
Fiscal Policy principles
13.(1)  The  following  general  principles  of  fiscal  management  apply
for the effective implementation of this Act:
(a)the  Principal  Account  Holder  and  Principal  Spending
Officer  of  a  covered  entity  shall  be  accountable  to  Parlia-
ment for the performance of their functions with respect to
the  implementation  of  fiscal  policies;
(b)Fiscal Policy shall be developed in a manner that takes into
account  the  impact  on  the  welfare  of  the  current  popula-
tion  and  future  generations;
(c)Fiscal  Policy  shall  be  conducted  in  a  manner  that  avoids
abrupt  changes  in  the  evolution  of  macroeconomic  and
fiscal  indicators;  and
(d)the  management  of   public  funds,  assets  and  liabilities,
including natural resources, and fiscal risks in the country
shall be conducted in a prudent way, with a view to main-
taining  fiscal  sustainability.
(2)  The following principles shall guide the formulation and imple-
mentation of  Fiscal Policy objectives:
(a)sufficient  revenue  mobilisation  to  finance  Government
programmes;
(b)maintenance  of  prudent  and  sustainable  levels  of  public
debt;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
13
  Act  921
(c)ensuring that the fiscal balance is maintained at a sustain-
able level over the medium term;
(d)management of fiscal risks in a prudent manner; and
(e)achieving  efficiency,  effectiveness  and  value  for  money  in
expenditure.
(3)  Fiscal management shall be carried out in a professional and
transparent manner and in accordance with best practice and standards.
(4)  For purposes of  subsection (3),
(a)the roles and responsibilities of a covered entity and public
officer  with  respect  to  the  implementation  of  the  Fiscal
Policy shall be clearly established and defined;
(b)timely  information  related  to  the  management  of  the
Fiscal  Policy  shall  be  made  available  to  enable  effective
scrutiny of  the Fiscal Policy and the management of  public
finances;  and
(c)a  person  responsible  for  publicising  information  shall  not
withhold  the  information  except  for  reasons  of  national
security, defence, or international obligations of  the Republic.
Fiscal Policy objectives
14.   (1)  The prime Fiscal Policy objective of  Government is to ensure
the  macroeconomic  stability  of  the  country  within  the  macroeconomic
and  fiscal  framework.
(2)  The  Government  may  determine  any  other  fiscal  policy
objective, consistent with the principles set out in section 13.
Fiscal Strategy Document
15.(1)  The  Minister  shall,  not  later  than  the  end  of  May  of  each
financial  year,  prepare  and  submit  to  Cabinet  for  approval,  a  Fiscal
Strategy  Document.
(2)  The Fiscal Strategy Document shall specify
(a)the  Medium-Term Fiscal Framework of  the Government
with measurable fiscal objectives and targets to guide short
and  medium  term  fiscal  planning  for  the  ensuing  three  to
five  year  period,  consistent  with  the  fiscal  principles  and
fiscal policy objectives of Government;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
14
Act  921
(b)an  updated  and  comprehensive  medium-term  macroeco-
nomic  and  fiscal  forecast  covering  current  developments
and multiple year projections in line with the co-ordinated
programmes of economic and social development policies
as specified in article 36(5) of the Constitution;
(c)the  Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework  of   the  Govern-
ment  with  a  resource  envelope  and  overall  expenditure
ceiling;
(d)a statement of policy measures the Government shall  imple-
ment in order to stay within the confines of the fiscal policy
objectives;
(e)a comprehensive and quantified fiscal risk statement for the
public sector showing the impact of alternative macroeco-
nomic  assumptions  on  the  forecast  fiscal  balances,  and
quantified  risks  of   guarantees,  contingent  liabilities  and
public  private  partnerships;
(f)the  Medium-Term  Debt  Management  Strategy  including
debt sustainability analysis and sensitivity analysis of macro-
fiscal risk senarios;
(g)a progress report on the implementation of the Fiscal Strategy
Document for the previous financial year; and
(h)the  alignment  of  statutory  and  other  earmarked  funds  to
national macro-fiscal goals and targets.
(3)  The  report  referred  to  under  paragraph  (g)  of  subsection  (2)
shall include
(a)an  update  on  the  macroeconomic  forecasts  and  fiscal
outturns;
(b)the implementation of the fiscal policy and progress against
the  fiscal  principles  and  rules,  including  targets  where
feasible;
(c) an explanation of  deviations from the fiscal principles, rules
and targets for the short and medium term objectives; and
(d)an explanation of the measures taken to respond to devia-
tions.
(4)  In addition to the requirements specified in subsection (2), the
Minister may propose specific numerical fiscal rules in the Fiscal Strategy
Document  to  constrain  Government  with  specific  reference  to  one  or
more budget aggregates subject to subsection (5).

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
15
  Act  921
(5)  A numerical rule proposed shall be consistent with
(a)the  Fiscal  Policy  objectives  and  Fiscal  Policy  indicators
specified under sections 14 and 16 respectively;
(b)the Petroleum Revenue Management Act, 2011 (Act 815); and
(c)any other relevant enactment.
Fiscal policy indicators
16.(1)   Compliance by Government with the fiscal policy objectives,
fiscal  policy  principles  and  other  requirements  shall  be  assessed  in
accordance with the following indicators:
(a)the non-oil primary balance or non-oil fiscal balance, as a
percentage  of  gross  domestic  product;  and
(b)any two of the following fiscal policy indicators:
 (i)   public debt as a percentage of gross domestic product;
(ii)capital  spending  as  a  percentage  of  total  expendi-
ture;
(iii)revenue as a percentage of gross domestic product;
or
(iv)  wage bill as a percentage of  tax revenue.
(2)  The Ministry shall review the fiscal policy indicators specified
in subsection (1), every five years.
Cabinet to adhere to targets in Fiscal Strategy Document
17.Subject  to  article  76(2)  of  the  Constitution,  Cabinet  shall,  adhere
to the targets set out in the Fiscal Strategy Document,
(a)in making decisions with implications for public finances,
(b)in  determining,  formulating  and  implementing  the  policies
of  the  Government,  or
(c)in  performing  any  function  conferred  on  it  by  the  Consti-
tution, this Act or any other enactment.
Suspension  of  rules  or  targets
18.(1)   A  fiscal target or rule provided for in the Fiscal Strategy Docu-
ment may be suspended with the prior written approval of Cabinet where
(a)any of the following events occur:
(i)a natural disaster, public health epidemic, or war as
a  result  of  which  a  state  of  emergency  has  been
declared  by  the  President  under  article  31  of  the
Constitution;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
16
Act  921
(ii)   an unanticipated severe economic shock, including
commodity and oil price shocks; and
(b)as  a  result  of  the  occurrence  of  an  event  under  paragraph
(a), the Minister is of the opinion that the implementation
of any of the fiscal targets or rules would be unduly harmful
to  the  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  or  financial  stability  of
the country.
(2)  Where an event under subsection (1) has occurred, the Minister
shall  submit  a  memorandum  to  Cabinet  to  request  for  approval  to
suspend any of the rules or targets in the Fiscal Strategy Document.
(3)   The Minister shall state in the memorandum
(a)the  reasons  why  the  implementation  of  the  fiscal  rule  or
target would be harmful to the finances and macroeconomic
or  financial  stability  of  the country;
(b)the  period  within  which  the  fiscal  rule  or  target  is  to  be
suspended;  and
(c)a fiscal adjustment plan setting out the measures to return
to  a  position  of  compliance  with  the  fiscal  rule  or  target
within a period of not more than five years.
Budget  Preparation,  Approval  and  Management
Salary negotiations for public sector
19.(1)   The Minister responsible for Employment in consultation with
the Minister shall ensure that
(a)salary  and  other  compensation negotiations  in  respect  of
the public sector for the ensuing financial year are completed
not later than the end of April of the current financial year;
and
(b)the  Fiscal  Strategy  Document  required  under  section  15
reflects the negotiated aggregate of public sector salaries and
compensation for the ensuing year.
(2)  Where salary and other compensation negotiations in respect
of the public sector are not completed by the end of April of the current
fiscal year, the Fiscal Strategy Document prepared for the ensuing fiscal
year shall state an expected negotiated aggregate of public sector salaries
and  compensation  for  the  ensuing  year  based  on  the  negotiated  public
sector salaries and compensation for the preceding fiscal year.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
17
  Act  921
Guidelines for preparation of annual budget
20.(1)  The Minister shall
(a)subject to Cabinet approval, issue guidelines for the prepa-
ration of the budget for each financial year; and
(b)circulate copies of the guidelines to each covered entity not
later than the 30th of  June of  every year.
(2)  The guidelines shall include
(a)the economic outlook for the country;
(b)revenue forecasts;
(c)fiscal targets in relation to the fiscal principles, particularly,
the  need  to  achieve  sustainable  levels  of  public  debt  and
fiscal balance;
(d)medium-term fiscal framework including key assumptions;
(e)the multiple year ceilings for each covered entity in line with
the Fiscal Strategy Document;
(f)the ceilings on the required number of staff for each covered
entity  and  the  cost  of  appropriation  for  the  relevant  year
for the public service;
(g)the reconciliation of any change to the previous Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework arising from the discretionary
policy  changes,  baseline  parameters,  and  re-allocation  of
expenditure  items;
(h)the  selection  criteria  for  investment  projects,  including
provision  for  linking  forward  recurrent  expenditure
estimates to investments;
(i)the  ceilings  for  the  preparation  of  the budget  estimates  of
local  government  authorities;
(j)details of expenditure under statutory funds and alignment
and co-ordination of  statutory funds with fiscal objectives,
targets and other aspects of the budget; and
(k)any  other  information  required  from  a  covered  entity  to
enable the Minister prepare the annual budget in accordance
with the requirements of section 21.
Annual budget
21.(1)  The  Minister  shall,
(a)in consultation with the relevant stakeholders, prepare the
proposed annual budget not later than 1st October of each
financial  year;  and

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
18
Act  921
(b) submit the proposed annual budget to Cabinet for approval
not later than the 15
th
 
 
of  October of   each financial year.
(2)   Cabinet shall, not later than the 30
th
 of October of each financial
year,  communicate  to  the  Minister,  the  decision  of   Cabinet  on  the
proposed  annual  budget.
(3)  The  Minister  shall,  on  behalf  of  the  President,  lay  before
Parliament not later than the 15th of  November of  each financial year,
estimates  of  the  revenues  and  expenditure  of  the  Government,  the
annual budget, for the ensuing financial year.
(4)   The  estimates  of  expenditure  of  all  public  offices  and  public
corporations other than those set up as commercial ventures, shall
(a)be classified under programmes or activities in the Appro-
priation Bill to be introduced into Parliament, and
(b)in respect of payments charged on the Consolidated Fund,
be  laid  before  Parliament  for  the  information  of  members
of  Parliament.
(5)   The annual budget shall
(a)be based on
(i)sound  analysis  and  forecasts  of  macro-economic
developments  and  fiscal  projections  in  relation  to
the Medium-Term National Development Plan; and
(ii)approved  plans;
(b)be consistent with the Fiscal Strategy Document;
(c)indicate
(i)    an  update  of  the  macro-economic  and  fiscal
projections in the Fiscal Strategy Document;
(ii)any  change  in  the  projections  of  fiscal  aggregates
under the Fiscal Strategy Document prepared and
an explanation for the change; and
(iii)any  change  in  the  fiscal  targets  and  ceilings  under
the  Medium-Term    Expenditure  Framework;
(d)set  out  the  recent  trends  and  developments  on  the  indica-
tors  of  the  economy  of  the  country  and  provide  forecasts
of  the indicators, for a three to five year period;
(e)provide detailed information on recent fiscal developments
and  forecasts  for  the  period  determined  by  the  Minister
under paragraph (d) in respect of

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
19
  Act  921
(i)  Government;
(ii)    recurrent and capital expenditures of Government;
(iii)   borrowing and debt servicing of the Government;
(iv)  an overall  net  borrowing  limit  for  Government
defined with reference to the Medium Term Fiscal
Framework, and the nominal limit of total financial
borrowing  by  Government  in  the  course  of  the
financial year;
(v)   contingent  liabilities  of  the  Government  including
those related to public private partnerships;
(vi)  the amount and uses of internally-generated funds
retained by a covered entity;
(vii)the amount of outstanding accounts receivable and
payable;
(viii)  a  statement of  tax expenditures, including the total
cost of existing tax expenditures and the disclosure
of new tax expenditures;
(ix)  the ceilings on the required number of staff for each
Ministry,  Department  or  Agency  and  the  corre-
sponding  amount  appropriated  to  operate  the  public
service for the ensuing financial year; and
(x)   any  other  information  in  respect  of  assets  and
liabilities  that  the  Minister  considers  appropriate;
(f)indicate  the  financing  estimates  for  the  financial  year  to
which the budget relates, including
(i)the financing to be transferred from the Petroleum
Funds and other similar funds to the Consolidated
Fund;
(ii)the  plans  for  domestic  financing  of  the  annual
budget comprising borrowings by Government and
the drawing down of  Government deposits;
(iii)the plans for external financing of the budget in the
form  of  borrowing  and  grants;
(iv)  a plan  for  the  government  debt  and  any  other
financial  liabilities  for  the  financial  year  to  which
the annual budget relates;
(v)   a plan for the guarantees to be issued in the financial
year; and
(vi)  a plan for divestment of government assets;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
20
Act  921
(g)provide  for  the  expenditure  estimates  for  the  preceding
financial  year,  the  current  financial  year,  and  the  ensuing
financial  year;
(h)contain  a  statement  of  the  multiple  year  commitments  to
be made by Government in the financial year, which shall
include a legally-binding ceiling on such commitments;
(i)include a schedule of  all major investment projects by vote,
taking account of total project costs and expected commit-
ments  of   the  annual  budget  and  Medium-Term  Expendi-
ture  Framework;
(j)indicate the budgets of covered entities and the opinion of
Government on the budgets; and
(k)state any grant or subvention made to a local government
authority  for  the  financial  year.
(6)  The Minister shall present the annual budget accompanied with
(a)the Appropriation Bill and any other Bill that is required to
implement the annual budget; and
(b)a memorandum specifying the measures taken by Govern-
ment to implement in the ensuing financial year the recom-
mendations  of  Parliament  in  respect  of  the  report  of  the
Auditor-General with respect to this Act.
(7)   The Minister shall, publish in the Gazette, the Appropriation
Act on or before the 31
st
 of  December of  each financial year.
(8)   For  the  purpose  of   subsection  (1),  “relevant  stakeholders”
include  the  Ministry  of   Finance,  Bank  of   Ghana,  Ghana  Statistical
Service, civil society organisations, Ministries, Departments and Agencies,
Ghana Revenue Authority, Controller and Accountant-General’s Depart-
ment, National Development Planning Commission and  local govern-
ment  authority.
Approval of annual budget by Parliament
22.(1)  Parliament  shall,  by  the  31st  of  December  of  each  financial
year,  consider  and  approve
(a)the  annual  budget  and  the  correlative  work  plan  of
Government for the ensuing financial year;
(b)the  Appropriation  Bill;  and
(c)any  other  Bill  that  may  be  required  to  implement  the
annual  budget.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
21
  Act  921
(2)  The annual budget, approved by Parliament, takes effect from
the 1st day of  January of  the ensuing year.
Expenditure in advance of appropriation
23.Where  the  President  is  satisfied  that  the  Appropriation  Act  in
respect of  a financial year, will not come into operation at the beginning
of   that  financial  year,  the  President  may,  with  the  prior  approval  of
Parliament,  by
(a)resolution  in  accordance  with  article  180  of  the  Constitu-
tion,  and
(b)warrant addressed to the Minister,
authorise the issue of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for purposes
of meeting the expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the  Gov-
ernment, until the expiration of three months from the beginning of that
financial  year,  or  from  the  coming  into  operation  of   the  Appropriation
Act, whichever is  earlier.
Budgeting on a gross basis
24.(1)   The revenues and expenditure of Government shall be entered
in the annual estimates of revenue and expenditure on a gross basis without
being netted with each other.
(2)   Despite subsection (1), tax revenue shall be entered in the annual
estimates  of  revenue  and  expenditure  after  deducting  the  estimated
amount of  tax refunds from the tax revenue.
Commitment  of  approved  budget
25.(1)  After  approval  of  the  annual  budget  by  Parliament,  the
Minister  shall,  within  ten  days  of  the  ensuing  month,  issue  quarterly
expenditure ceilings in respect of approved annual budget.
(2)  The  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall,  based  on  the
quarterly expenditure ceilings issued under subsection (1), release funds
to  the  Principal  Spending  Officers  of  covered  entities.
(3)  A  Principal  Spending  Officer  shall  commit  the  budget  of  a
covered entity based on the quarterly warrants issued under this section.
(4)  A Principal Spending Officer or any other public officer shall
not  commit  Government  to  a  financial  liability,  including  contingent
liability, unless that Principal Spending Officer is specifically authorised
to do so under this Act, the Regulations or directives issued pursuant to
this Act.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
22
Act  921
(5)  A commitment in respect of staff recruitment shall, subject to
financial clearance by the Minister, be within the limits set by Parliament
under section 21 (5) (e) (ix).
(6)  Where  a  covered  entity  enters  into  a  contract  or  any  other
arrangement that commits or purports to commit Government to make
a payment, the contract or arrangement shall be approved by the Principal
Spending  Officer  of  that  covered  entity  and  the  Principal  Spending
Officer shall enter the contract or arrangement into the Ghana Integrated
Financial  Management  Information  System.
(7)  Subject  to  Parliamentary  approval  granted  under  section  21,
the Minister shall grant clearance before a covered entity signs a multi-
year  contract.
(8)  The  Minister  shall,  in  accordance  with  spending  plans
approved  under  section  22,  approve  commitments  subject  to  the  avail-
ability  of  sufficient  unencumbered  or  uncommitted  appropriation  on
the  expenditure  ceilings  in  respect  of  that  commitment  except  that  this
subsection,  shall  not  apply  to  the  Judiciary,  Legislature  and  the  Audit
Service.
(9)   A Principal Spending Officer shall
(a)maintain  records  of  all  financial  commitments  chargeable
to each appropriation or item of expenditure in respect of
a covered entity, and
(b)ensure  that  each  commitment  or  expenditure  is  in  accor-
dance  with  the  commitment  control  system  prescribed
under  the  Regulations.
(10)  A Principal Spending Officer who contravenes subsection (4)
is liable to an administrative penalty of two thousand penalty units.
Expiry of appropriation
26.(1)   Each appropriation approved by Parliament shall cease to have
effect at the close of the financial year in respect of which the appropria-
tion was made.
(2)  Any  balance  of  moneys  unexpended  from  the  Consolidated
Fund or any other public fund for a financial year by Government by the
close of  the year, shall elapse by the 31st of  January of  the ensuing year.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
23
  Act  921
P
erformance  report
27.(1)  Each Principal Account Holder shall, within the first quarter
of  the  ensuing  year  after  the  Minister  submits  the  annual  budget  to
Parliament, submit to Parliament, a performance report on budget imple-
mentation  for  the  proceeding  financial  year.
(2)  Each  Principal  Account  Holder  shall  submit  a  copy  of  the
performance report required under subsection (1) to the Minister.
(3)   The  Minister  shall  determine  the  format  of  the  performance
report required under subsection (1).
(4)  The performance report shall indicate
(a)the  achievements  of  the  Principal  Account  Holder  for  the
preceding  financial  year;
(b)the  annual  work  plan  comprising  the  objectives,  outputs,
outcomes,  targets  and  performance  indicators;
(c)the staff establishment of the Principal Account Holder in
respect of a vote for the preceding year and ensuing three
years;
(d)a  statement  on  the  actions  taken  by  the  covered  entity  to
implement  the  recommendations  of  Parliament  in  
respect
of the most recent report of the Auditor-General; and
(e)any major investment to be implemented for more than one
year,  including
 (i)   any  multi-year  investment;
(ii)   the total  cost  of   the  major  investment  within  the
medium  term  profile  set  out  in  the  Medium  Term
Expenditure  Framework,  and
(iii)  the  respective  amount  to  be  appropriated  in  the
budget  year.
Mid-year review
28.(1)  The  Minister  shall,  not  later  than  the  31st  of  July  of  each
financial year, prepare and submit to Parliament a mid-year fiscal policy
review.
(2)  The  mid-year  fiscal  policy  review  shall  include  the  following
information:
(a)a   brief overview of recent macroeconomic developments
of  Government;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
24
Act  921
(b)an  update  of  macroeconomic  forecasts  undertaken  by
Government;
(c)an analysis of  the total revenue, expenditure and financing
performance  for  a  period  up  to  the  first  six  months  of  the
financial  year;
(d)a  presentation  of  a  revised  budget  outlook  for  the  unex-
pired term of  the financial year, and the implication of  the
revised  budget  outlook  for  the  Medium-Term  Fiscal  and
Expenditure  Framework  if  necessary;  and
(e)where necessary
(i)plans  for  submitting  a  proposed  supplementary
budget for approval by Parliament; and
(ii)   an overview  of  the  implementation  of  the  annual
budget and of the budgets of covered entities.
Re-allocation of funds from a covered entity
29.(1)  Subject  to  any  limitation  that  Parliament  may  impose,  the
Minister  may,  re-allocate  funds  that  have  been  allocated  to  a  covered
entity to another covered entity specified in the annual budget in the event
where the  functions  of  that  covered  entity  are  transferred  to  another
covered  entity.
(2)  The Minister report to Parliament in the next reporting period on
a re-allocation in subsection (1).
Budget implementation by Principal Spending Officers
30.(1)   A  Principal  Spending  Officer  shall,  plan  and  manage  the
activities  of  a    covered  entity  in  accordance  with  the  policy  statement
and financial estimates of  that covered entity.
(2) A  covered  entity  shall  not  obtain  a  credit  facility  from  any
person  if  that  covered  entity
(a)has  not  obtained  permission  from  the  Minister;
(b)has  unpaid  arrears  from  a  debt  incurred  in  a  previous
financial  year;  and
(c)does not have the capacity to pay for the expenditure from
the  approved  estimates  as  appropriated  by  Parliament  for
that  financial  year.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
25
  Act  921
(3)  A Principal Spending Officer shall, not later than the 1
st
 day of
the months of  April, July, September, and December of  each year, in the
format determined by the Chief  Director, submit a report to the  Minister
on the activities or programmes of the respective covered entity and the
implementation  of  the  budget  of  the  covered  entity  for  the  preceding
quarter,  including  the  actual  and  forecast  commitments  and  cash  posi-
tions of  the covered entity.
(4)  The  Minister  shall,  not  later  than  the  end  of  the  third  week
after the end of  a quarter, submit to Parliament, a consolidated expenditure
commitment report to cover all the reports submitted under subsection (3).
(5)  For  purposes  of   this  section  “policy  statement”  means  the
medium-term  development  plans  of  Government.
Cash flow forecast
31.
A Principal Spending Officer shall, in accordance with the Regu-
lations, prepare and submit to the Minister monthly cash flow forecasts
of  the  covered  entity  for  the  ensuing  three  months  or  any  other  period
that the Minister may specify.
Virement
32.(1)  The  Minister  may,  on  the  request  of   a  Principal  Spending
Officer, execute a virement in respect of  an amount of  money allocated
to the covered entity of  that Principal Spending Officer.
(2)  A virement executed under subsection (1) shall not result in a
future liability for that covered entity or the Government.
(3)  A  virement  executed  under  subsection  (1)  is  subject  to  the
following  conditions:
(a)a virement of funds allocated for wages and salaries in an
expenditure vote shall not be made unless the virement is in
respect of wages and salaries within that expenditure vote;
(b)a  virement  that  involves  a  change  in  the  spending  plans
approved by the Minister for the current financial year shall
require the prior written approval from the Minister;
(c)a  virement  may  be  made  from  a  recurrent  expenditure  to
capital expenditure as well as from one capital expenditure
to another capital expenditure but shall  not be made from
a capital expenditure  to a recurrent expenditure; and

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
26
Act  921
(d)a  virement  shall  not  be  made  in  respect  of  appropriated
amounts between covered entities without the approval of
Parliament in a supplementary estimate.
(4)  Subject to subsection (3), the Minister may delegate to a covered
entity, the authority to vary economic classifications within that covered
entity up to a limit specified by the Minister, subject to the submission of
a quarterly report by that entity to the Minister and Parliament.
Multi-year expenditure commitments
33.(1)
A  covered  entity  shall  not  enter  into  any  agreement
 
with  a
financial  commitment  that  binds  the  Government  for  more  than  one
financial  year  or  that  results  in  a  contingent  liability  except  where  the
financial  commitment  or  the  contingent  liability
(a)is with the prior written approval of  the Minister, and
(b)authorised by Parliament in accordance with article 181 of
the  Constitution.
(2)  Parliament  may,  in  the  annual  budget,  authorise  a  covered
entity to make a multi-year expenditure commitment, and where Parlia-
ment  so  authorises,  the  annual  budget  shall  indicate  the  commitment
approved  for  the  financial  year  and  the  approved  multi-year  commit-
ments.
(3)  A  multi-year  expenditure  commitment  approved  under
subsection (2) shall be consistent with the objectives of the Fiscal Strategy
Document.
(4)  The  Minister  shall,  in  accordance  with  section  25,  submit  to
Parliament  a  report  on  the  performance  of  the  multi-year  expenditure
commitments made for each financial year.
(5)  A Principal Spending Officer may propose or commit to invest
in  a  project  only  after  expert  assessment  has  been  completed  and  the
justification for the investment project and efficiency is established.
Submission of half-yearly reports on budget implementation
34.(1)  The  Minister  shall  submit  to  Parliament,  not  later  than  the
30th day of  the months of  January and July of  each year, a half-yearly
report  on  budget  implementation  performance.
(2)  The report required under subsection (1) shall include
(a)programmes and a major category of economic classifica-
tions;  and

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
27
  Act  921
(b)a  brief  statement  of  programme  performance  by  each
Principal  Account  Holder.
Supplementary  budget
35.(1)  Where in a financial year, it is found that the amount appro-
priated by the Appropriation Act is insufficient, or that a need has arisen
for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated
by  the  Appropriation  Act,  the  Minister  shall  lay  before  Parliament  for
approval,  a  supplementary  estimate,  in  the  form  of   a  Supplementary
Appropriation  Bill  indicative  of  the  amount  required.
(2)  The Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall indicate how the
supplementary expenditure shall be financed.
(3)  The appropriated budget of a covered entity under section 21
does not include the supplementary budget of  the covered entity.
(4)  The  Minister  shall,  subject  to  section  18,  ensure  that  supple-
mentary  expenditure  under  a  Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  is  not
likely to breach the objectives, targets, or rules set out in the Fiscal Strategy
Document.
Contingency Fund
36.(1) There shall be paid into the Contingency Fund moneys voted
for  the  purpose  by  Parliament;  and  advances  may  be  made  from  the
Contingency  Fund  which  are  authorised  by  the  Committee  responsible
for financial matters in Parliament whenever the Committee is satisfied
that  there  has  arisen  an  urgent  or  unforeseen  need  for  expenditure  for
which no other provision exists to meet the need.
(2)  Where  an  advance  is  made  from  the  Contingency  Fund,  a
supplementary estimate shall be presented as soon as possible to Parlia-
ment for the purpose of replacing the amount advanced.
Sinking Fund and Debt Servicing
Creation of Sinking Fund
37.(1)  The Minister may create a Sinking Fund.
(2)  The  Sinking  Fund  shall  be  used  to  redeem  specified  debt
obligations  of  Government.
(3)  The  Minister  shall,  as  part  of  the  annual  budget,  specify  and
provide an update on the loans to be redeemed by the Sinking Fund.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
28
Act  921
(4)  For the purpose of  this Act, a “Sinking Fund” means a special
fund created for the redemption of  a loan or a pool of  loans, purchase of
loans  or  any  other  related  purpose  by  means  of  a  periodic  contribution
into  a  fund  which  is  calculated  in  a  manner  that  when  accumulated  at
compound interest over the life of  the loan, the sum available in the fund
shall be sufficient to redeem the loan.
Sources of money for the Sinking Fund
38.The sources of money for the Sinking Fund are
(a)periodic contributions of specified amounts determined by
the Minister as  part of the annual budget;
(b)repayment  inflows  of  money  on-lent  by  the  Ministry  to
covered entities, state- owned enterprises and public corpo-
rations;
(c)moneys  that  accrue  to  the  Fund  from  investment  of
moneys  of  the  Fund;
(d)moneys  borrowed  or  raised  from  capital  markets  for  the
purpose  of    redemption  of  existing  debts;
(e)moneys approved by Parliament for debt repayment under
subsection  (4)  of   section  23  of   the  Petroleum  Revenue
Management Act 2011 (Act 815); and
(f)any  other  moneys  that  the  Minister,  with  the  approval  of
Parliament  determines to be paid into the Fund.
Administration of Sinking Fund
39.(1)  The Controller and Accountant-General shall administer the
Sinking Fund created under subsection (1) of section 37.
(2)  The Controller and Accountant-General shall for the purpose
of  subsection (1), invest moneys of  the Sinking Fund.
(3)   For the purpose of  subsection (2), the Minister shall issue an
Investment Policy Statement.
Bank account of the Sinking Fund
40.(1)  The Controller and Accountant-General shall pay moneys for
the  Sinking  Fund  into  a  bank  account  opened  for  the  purpose  with  the
approval  of   the  Minister.
(2)   The  bank  account  opened  for  the  Sinking  Fund  shall  be
considered to be part of  the Treasury Single Account.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
29
  Act  921
Payment from Sinking Fund
41.(1)   A payment shall not be made from the Sinking Fund unless
the  funds  are  required  for  the  redemption  of  a  loan  specified  under
subsection (3) of section 37.
(2)  Subsection (1) includes a buyback of a debt obligation on the
open  market.
Accounts and audit
42.(1)  The  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall  keep  accounts
of the Sinking Fund in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles and in the form agreed to by the Auditor-General.
(2)  The  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall  submit  the
accounts of the Fund to the Auditor-General for audit within three months
after the end of  the financial year.
(3)  The  Auditor-General  shall  not  later  than  three  months  after
the receipt of  the accounts, audit the accounts and forward a copy of  the
audit  report  to  the  Minister.
Annual report and other reports
43.(1)  The  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall  within  one
month  after  receipt  of  the  audit  report,  submit  an  annual  report  to  the
Minister  covering  the  activities  and  operations  of  the  Sinking  Fund  for
the year to which the report relates.
(2)  The  annual  report  shall  include  the  report  of  the  Auditor-
General and a report on the performance of the Sinking Fund relative to
its statutory object.
(3)  The  Minister  shall  within  one  month  after  the  receipt  of  the
annual report submit the report to Parliament with the statement that the
Minister considers necessary.
(4)  The  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall  also  submit  to
the Minister any other reports which the Minister may require in writing.
Transfer  of  money
44.The total sum of money located in any bank immediately before
the coming into force of this Act, which constitutes moneys designated
for the repayment of  loans, shall at the coming into force of  this Act be
transferred into the Fund created under section 37 (1).
Cash  and  Asset  Management
Management  and  use  of  Government  moneys
45.(1)  The Minister is responsible for the management and efficient

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
30
Act  921
use of all revenues and moneys paid into the Consolidated Fund and any
other public funds designated as being in the care of  the Minister.
(2)  For the purposes of  subsection (1), the Minister
(a)shall ensure co-ordination between the  cash management
of  Government and the fiscal policy, monetary policy and
debt  management  policy  of  Government;
(b)shall establish the  institutional  and  administrative arrange-
ments  required  to  manage  the  cash  management  system
within  the  Ministry;  and
(c)may request a person, including a Ministry, Department or
Agency,  to    provide  any  information  that  the  Minister
considers  necessary  for  the  effective  operation  of  the  cash
management  system.
Treasury Single Account
46.There is established by this Act, a Treasury Single Account
(a)which  is  to  serve  as  a  unified  structure  of  Government
accounts to give a consolidated view of Government cash
resources; and
(b)into which all Government cash including moneys received
by  covered  entities  shall  be  deposited  and  from  which  all
expenditure  of  Government  and  covered  entities  shall  be
made.
Collection, deposit and retention of  Government revenue
47.(1)  A covered entity shall not collect or receive revenue except where
the  covered  entity  is  authorised  by  an  Act  of  Parliament  to  collect  or
receive the revenue.
(2)  The  revenue  collected  or  received  by  a  covered  entity  under
subsection (1) shall
(a)be paid into and form part of  the Consolidated Fund;
(b)be receivable into a public Fund; and
(c)be  receivable  into  a  public  fund  established  for  a  specific
purpose where authorised by the Constitution or an Act of
Parliament.
(3)   A  covered  entity  may  retain  revenue  collected  or  received,
where the revenue is in the form of  a levy, licence fee or administrative
penalty  and  the  covered  entity  is  authorised  through  appropriation  by
Parliament to retain the revenue.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
31
  Act  921
Consolidated  Fund
48.(1)   Any  revenue  or  other  money  raised  or  received  for  Govern-
ment shall form part of the Consolidated Fund.
(2)   Dividends due to Government shall be paid into the Consoli-
dated  Fund  without  any  deduction.
(3)   The Minister may, by warrant to the Controller and Accountant-
General, authorise a prepayment from the Consolidated Fund to
(a)a public fund established by or under an Act of Parliament,
or
(b)a  Principal  Spending  Officer,  where  the  prepayment  is  to
fund  an  expenditure  which  is  approved  under  an  Appro-
priation  Act  or  a  Supplementary  Appropriation  Act.
Investment of balances on the Consolidated Fund
49.(1)  The Minister may
(a)authorise the Controller and Accountant-General to invest
any  sum  standing  to  the  credit  of  the  Consolidated  Fund
with
 (i)   the Bank of Ghana, or
(ii)   an approved  financial  institution,  or
(b)invest  any  sum  standing  to  the  credit  of   the  Consolidated
Fund, in an instrument other than government instrument
that  the  Minister  considers  appropriate.
(2)  The Instrument referred to in subsection (1) shall mature within
the fiscal year.
Spending from the Consolidated Fund
50.(1)   Subject to article 178 of the Constitution, an expenditure shall
not be met  from  the  Consolidated  Fund  except  on the  authority of a
warrant issued by the Minister to the Controller and Accountant-General.
 (2)  The Minister shall issue a warrant for payment
(a)that is authorised under an Appropriation Act or a Supple-
mentary  Appropriation  Act  for  the  financial  year  that  the
withdrawal  is  intended  for;
(b)for repaying moneys erroneously paid into the Consolidated
Fund or other public funds;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
32
Act  921
(c)for  paying  sums  required  for  advance,  refund,  rebate  or
drawback  where  the  payment  of   the  advance,  refund,
rebate  or  drawback  is  provided  for  in  this  or  any  other
enactment;  or
(d)that is subject to cash available under section 45.
(3)  The  Minister  may  suspend,  withdraw,  limit  or  place  condi-
tions on a warrant under this section where the Minister determines that
the suspension, withdrawal, limitation or condition is necessary due to a
financial exigency or for purposes of public interest.
Bank  account  management
51.(1)  A  bank  account  shall  not  be  opened  for  any  covered  entity
without the written approval of the Controller and Accountant-General.
(2)  Subject to the written approval of the Controller and Accountant-
General, a bank account shall not be opened to receive or spend public
funds.
  (3)  A  bank  account  shall  be  managed  by  a  covered  entity  in
accordance with the terms and conditions determined by the Controller
and  Accountant-General.
(4)   Subject to subsection (5), the Bank of Ghana is the depository
of cash for the recurrent and capital operations of all covered entities.
 (5)   The Controller and Accountant-General may authorise a covered
entity to open a bank account in an approved financial institution.
(6)   The Controller and Accountant-General shall ensure that all
government  bank  accounts  are  reconciled  regularly  and  in  accordance
with generally accepted accounting practices.
(7)   The Controller and Accountant-General
(a)shall regulate the operation of a bank account of a covered
entity;  and
(b)may,  with  the  prior  written  approval  of   the  Minister,
suspend  or  close  a  bank  account  if  the  Controller  and
Accountant-General  considers  it  necessary  in  the  public
interest.
(8)   A Principal Spending Officer of a covered entity shall before
the closure of a bank account under the control of that Principal Spending
Officer, in writing, obtain the approval of  the Controller and Accountant-
General for the closure of the bank account.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
33
  Act  921
(9)  The  Bank  of   Ghana  or  where  applicable,  a  financial  institu-
tion  that  holds  a  bank  account  on  behalf  of  a  covered  entity  shall,  on
request  by  the  Controller  and  Accountant-General  or  the  Auditor-
General,  in  writing,  disclose  any  financial  information  regarding  the
account, within fourteen days after receipt of the request.
Custody  and  management  of  assets
52.(1)  A Principal Spending Officer of  a covered entity, state-owned
enterprise or public corporation shall be responsible for the assets of the
institution  under  the  care  of  the  Principal  Spending  Officer  and  shall
ensure that proper control systems exist for the custody and management
of  the  assets.
(2)   A control system specified in subsection (1) shall be capable
of  ensuring  that
(a)preventive mechanisms are in place to eliminate theft, loss,
wastage and misuse; and
(b)processes,  whether  manual  or  electronic,  and  procedures
are in place for the effective, efficient, economical and trans-
parent use of the assets.
(3)  A Principal Spending Officer shall maintain a register of
(a)lands and buildings under the control or possession of that
Principal  Spending  Officer;  and
(b)all  other  assets  under  the  control  or  possession  of  the
Principal  Spending  Officer.
(4)  The register referred to in subsection (3) (a) shall contain a record
of  the  details  of  each  parcel  of  land  and  each  building  and  the  terms  on
which  the  land  or  building  is  held,  with  reference  to  the  conveyance,
address,  area,  date  of   acquisition,  disposal  or  major  change  in  use,  cost,
lease terms, maintenance contracts and other pertinent management details.
(5)  The register referred to in subsection (3) (b) shall contain a record
of  the  details  of  all  major  items  of  furniture  and  equipment  including
furniture and equipment  issued for either government quarters or offices,
large tools for government works, plant, equipment and vehicles.
(6)  A Principal Spending Officer shall maintain adequate records
of  government  stores.
(7)  The Principal Spending Officer is discharged of accountability
of  government stores where the stores have been
(a)consumed in the course of public business and records are
available to show that the stores have been consumed;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
34
Act  921
(b)worn out in the normal course of public business and deletion
from the accounts has been approved by the Minister and
they  have  been  disposed  of   in  accordance  with  the  direc-
tives  of  the  Minister;  or
(c)lost, stolen, destroyed, damaged or rendered unserviceable
other  than  by  fair  wear  and  tear  and  deletion  from  the
accounts has been approved by Parliament.
(8)  The Minister may, by legislative instrument,  delegate powers
of deletion and disposal of government assets to the Principal Spending
Officer of  a covered entity, state-owned enterprise or public corporation.
(9)  A Principal Spending Officer shall not delegate a power granted
under subsection (8).
Abandonment of claims and write off of public funds
53.(1)   The Minister shall seek the approval of Parliament, to
(a)abandon or remit a claim by or on behalf of Government,
(b)abandon or remit a service to the Government, and
write off a loss of or a deficiency in public funds or public resources.
(2)  Where  Parliament  grants  approval  under  subsection  (1),  the
approval shall be by a resolution of a simple majority of Parliament.
  (3)  The  approval  under  subsection  (1)  shall  specify  the  amount
authorised for each abandonment or write off and the total sum authorised
to be written off or abandoned.
(4)  The  Minister  may,  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations,
abandon  or  remit
(a)a claim by or on behalf of Government;
(b)abandon or remit a service to Government; and
write  off   a  loss  of   or  a  deficiency  in  public  funds  or  public  resources,
where the amount involved is within the threshold set out in the Regula-
tions.
(5)  The Minister shall, within three months after the end of each
financial year, lay before Parliament
(a)a  statement  of  the  losses  written  off  by  the  Minister  in
accordance with subsection (1);
(b)a  statement  of  the  losses  written  off    by  the  Minister  in
accordance with subsection (4); and
(c)a  list  of  the  public  officers  surcharged  for  loss  of,  or  a
deficiency in public moneys or public resources.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
35
  Act  921
(6)  The amount in excess shall be treated as a loss of public funds
in accordance with section 96.
(7)  Where
(a)a loss or an abandonment of  a loss, or
(b)a remittance of the total loss which is abandoned or remit-
ted  exceeds  the  amount  authorised  by  Parliament,  the
amount in excess shall be treated as a loss of public funds in
accordance with section 97.
Public Debt Management
Functions of the Public Debt Management Office
54.(1)  The  Ministry  of   Finance  shall  have  an  office  that  is  respon-
sible for public debt management and which shall be under the supervi-
sion of the Chief Director in accordance with the Civil Service Act, 1993
(PNDC Law 327).
(2)   The Public Debt Management Office shall
(a)handle debt management operations of the Government;
(b)assess risks for government guarantees and lending;
(c)assess  all  forms  of  credit  agreements  including  suppliers’
credit, buyer’s  credit,  mixed  credit  and  finance  lease  agree-
ments to be entered into by the Government;
(d)assess  the  feasibility  of  borrowing  requirements  implied
by  the  path  for  the  fiscal  deficit  in  the  Fiscal  Strategy
Document;
(e)formulate  the  Medium-Term  Debt  Management  Strategy;
and
(f)perform any other functions that may be determined by the
Minister.
Government  borrowing  and  debt  management
55.(1)   Subject  to  article181  of  the  Constitution  and  this  Act,  the
Minister  has  the  authority  to  raise  a  loan  on  behalf  of  the  Government,
both within and outside the country and in local and foreign currencies.
(2)  The Minister shall not delegate a power granted under subsection
(1) to any other person.
(3)  The proceeds of all borrowings on behalf of the Government
shall be
(a)paid  into  and  form  part  of  the  Consolidated  Fund;  and
(b)utilised for any of the purposes stated  in section 57.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
36
Act  921
(4)   Government  shall  cause  to  be  opened  a  bank  account  for
purposes  of  depositing  all  government  borrowings.
Approval  of  Parliament  of  terms  and  conditions  of  government
borrowings
56.(1)   The terms and conditions of all government borrowings shall
be  laid  before  Parliament  and  shall  not  come  into  operation  unless  the
terms  and  conditions  are  approved  by  a  resolution  of  Parliament  in
accordance with article 181 of the Constitution.
(2)   For the purpose of  subsection (1), Parliament may, from time
to  time,  by  resolution,  approve  standard  terms  and  conditions  for
government  borrowings  including  the  following:
(a)the  nature  of  facility;
(b)purpose  of  government  borrowing;
(c)condition  of   drawdown;
(d)terms  of  interest  payment  and  repayment;
(e)pre-payment  and  cancellation;
(f)fees and charges in respect of the borrowing;
(g)tax  gross-up  and  indemnities;
(h)other  indemnities;
(i)events  of  default;
(j)conduct of business by the parties;
(k)  payment  mechanisms;
(l)costs and expenses;
(m)remedies and waivers;
(n)amendments  and  waivers;
(o)governing  law  and  jurisdiction;
(p)agent’s  option;
(q)arbitration;
(r)waiver  of  immunity;
(s)conditions  precedent;
(t)conditions  of  payment;
(u)documents to be submitted;
(v)collateral security; and
(w)force majeure.
Borrowing  purposes
57.(1)  Government may borrow for the following purposes:
(a)to  finance  government  budget  deficit  as  approved  by
Parliament;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
37
  Act  921
(b)to build up and maintain a liquidity buffer at a level or range
determined by the Minister;
(c)to  on-lend  funds  to  local  government  authorities,  state
owned enterprises, public corporations or any other entity
as approved by Parliament;
(d)to  honour  obligations  under  outstanding  government
guarantees;
(e)to refinance outstanding government debt, including repay-
ment  of  a  loan  prior  to  the  maturity  date  of  the  loan  and
repurchase of government debt securities; and
(f)for any other purpose as may be approved by Parliament.
 (2)  The issuance of a government debt security under this section
shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  Medium-Term  Debt  Management
Strategy and the annual borrowing plan.
(3)  For purposes of  this section “liquidity buffer” means the accu-
mulation of funds reserved for debt restructuring and cash management.
Debt  management  objectives
58.(1)   The objectives of government debt management are to  ensure
that
(a)the  financing  needs  of  Government  are  met  on  a  timely
basis;
 (b)borrowing costs to Government are as low as possible over
the medium to long term, consistent with a prudent degree
of  risk;
(c)the development of the Ghanaian debt market is promoted;
and
(d)any other action considered to impact positively on public
debt is pursued.
(2)  The  Minister  shall  be  responsible  for  ensuring  that  the  debt
management objectives set out under subsection (1) are achieved.
Debt management strategy
59.(1)   The  Public  Debt  Management  Office  shall,  submit  to  the
Minister,  a  Medium-Term  Debt  Management  Strategy  for  the  manage-
ment  of  government  debt.
 (2)  The Public Debt Management Office shall,
(a)on a rolling basis, update the Medium-Term Debt Manage-
ment Strategy at least once a year; and

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
38
Act  921
(b)submit  the  update  in  respect  of   the  Medium-Term  Debt
Management  Strategy  to  the  Minister.
(3)  The Minister shall not later than December of the preceding
year, review the Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy and submit
the strategy to Cabinet for approval.
(4)  The Minister shall publish the approved Medium-Term Debt
Management  Strategy  on  the  website  of  the  Ministry  and  any  other
medium  determined by the Minister.
(5)  The Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy shall be based
on  the  debt  management  objectives  set  out  in  section  58  and  shall  take
into  account
(a)the cost and risk embedded in the current debt portfolio;
(b)future  borrowing  requirements  and  debt  recovery  mecha-
nisms of  the  Government;
(c)the  macro-economic  framework  of  the  country;
(d)prevailing  market  conditions;  and
(e)any other factors that may be relevant for the development
of  the Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy.
(6)  The  Medium-Term  Debt  Management  Strategy  shall  include
guidelines or ranges for the acceptable market risks in the debt portfolio
and  planned  borrowings  and  other  debt  management  activities  to
promote  development  of  the  Ghanaian  debt  market.
(7)  Upon approval of  the Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy,
all Government borrowings and other debt management operations shall
be undertaken in compliance with the Medium-Term Debt Management
Strategy and approved revisions to the strategy.
Annual borrowing and recovery plan
60.(1)   The Public Debt Management Office shall,  not later than the
month of  December of  the preceding financial year, prepare  an annual
borrowing  and recovery plan  to  meet  the  aggregate  borrowing  require-
ments of   Government for each financial year.
(2) The annual borrowing and recovery plan shall be based on the
approved Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy and shall include
(a)planned borrowing operations over the year;
(b)
borrowing instruments to be used; and
(c)the  indicative  timing  of  the  borrowings.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
39
  Act  921
(3)  The annual borrowing and recovery plan shall be updated at
least every six months.
(4)  The Minister shall review and approve the annual borrowing
and recovery plan and updates to the plan.
(5)  The Minister shall publish on the website of  the Ministry, the
approved annual borrowing and recovery plan and updates to the plan.
Issuance of government debt securities in the domestic debt market
61.(1)   The  issuance  of  government  debt  securities  in  the  domestic
market shall be by way of auction or any other method approved by the
Minister.
(2)  For  the  purpose  of   subsection  (1),  the  Minister  shall,  by
Regulations, or rules or guidelines published in the Gazette, regulate the
format  of  and  criteria  for  the  auction  and  the  procedures  for  participation,
bidding,  and  allocation  in  auctions.
Issuance of government debt securities abroad
62.The issuance of government debt securities outside the country shall
(a)be in the manner and on the terms and conditions approved
by Parliament; and
(b)subject to subsections (2) and (4) of section 60 be based on
the annual borrowing and recovery plan.
Borrowing from banks and other financial institutions
63.Government  borrowing  from  banks  and  other  financial  institu-
tions by means of a loan agreement shall
(a)be  on  the  terms  and  conditions  approved  by  Parliament;
and
(b)subject to subsections (2) and (4) of section 60 be based on
the annual borrowing and recovery plan.
Other market transactions
64.(1)  Subject to subsection (2), the Minister may, in accordance with
the debt management objectives and the medium-term debt management
strategy, undertake other market transactions, including
(a)entering into financial swaps and other derivative transactions
on behalf of Government for the purpose of managing the
risks  of  Government  under  various  financial  transactions;
(b)offering  buybacks  and  exchanges  of  government  debt
securities;  and
(c)offering  early  repayment  of  loans  before  the  date  of
maturity  of  the  loans.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
40
Act  921
(2)  A  transaction  under  subsection  (1)(a) is  subject  to  the
approval  of  Parliament.
Status of Government debt
65.(1)  A government debt is an absolute and unconditional financial
obligation  of  the  Government.
(2)   A  debt  charge  is  a  statutory  claim  against  the  Consolidated
Fund,  without  further  appropriation.
(3)   For purposes of  subsection (2), a debt charge includes
(a)moneys required to provide a sinking fund or other means
of    securing  repayment  of  debt  securities;
(b)the  remuneration  and  compensation  of  registrars  and
fiscal agents  appointed under this Act;
(c) costs, expenses and charges incurred in the
(i)negotiation  or  raising    of  a  loan;  or
(ii)issue,  redemption,  servicing,  payment  or  manage-
ment of a  loan or a debt security issued in respect
of  a  loan;  and
(d)moneys required to be paid under a contract or agreement
related to government debt.
Government  guarantees
66.(1)  Subject to this Act, the Minister may issue a guarantee on behalf
of  Government  in  respect  of  the  obligation  of  a  local  government
authority,  public  corporation  or  other  entity  if,  considering  the  debt
management  objectives  and  the  debt  management  strategy  of  the
Government, the Minister is satisfied that
(a)it is in the public interest to issue the guarantee; and
(b)the beneficiary of the guarantee has the ability to
(i)repay the underlying loan; and
(ii)   fulfill  all  payment  and  other  obligations  under  the
underlying loan and under the guarantee and related
agreements.
(2)  The Public Debt Management Office shall, before the issuance
of a government guarantee under subsection (1), assess the local govern-
ment authority, public corporation or other entity to ascertain the fiscal
risk  of   that  local  government  authority,  public  corporation  or  other
entity to the Government in respect of  that guarantee.
(3)  The result of the risk assessment and the method used in the

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
41
  Act  921
assessment shall be submitted to the Minister in written form.
(4)  A government guarantee is subject to prior approval by Parlia-
ment.
(5)  Unless otherwise determined by Parliament, a beneficiary of a
government guarantee shall
(a)pay a guarantee fee determined by the  Minister, in consul-
tation  with  the  Director  responsible  for  the  Public  Debt
Management Office, to cover the credit risk of  Government
upon the signing of the guarantee; and
 (b)reimburse or pay in a manner directed  by the  Minister, the
(i)    moneys  paid  by  Government  to  honour  the
guarantee  where  the  beneficiary  defaults  and  the
Government  is  required  to    honor  an  obligation
under the guarantee;
(ii)expenses incurred by Government in relation to the
guarantee;  and
(iii)interest  on  all  moneys  paid  by  Government  to
honour  the  guarantee.
(6)   The Minister shall pay into the Consolidated Fund guarantee
fees received under paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (5).
(7)  A government guarantee shall be supported by appropriate  legal
documentation executed by the beneficiary of the guarantee  indemnifying
Government for any amount paid by Government under the guarantee.
(8)  Where  a  beneficiary  of  a  government  guarantee  neglects  or
fails to honour the obligations of that beneficiary under the loan agreement
to the creditor or make good an indemnity to Government, the Minister
shall
(a)proceed  to  enforce  the  rights  of  Government  under  the
indemnity,  and
(b)pursue any action necessary to recover from the beneficiary,
moneys  owed  to  Government  under  the  guarantee  agree-
ment and indemnity together with interest at the prevailing
market  rate.
(9)  The  moneys  recovered  by  Government  under  subsection  (8)
shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
42
Act  921
(10) A letter  of   intent,  letter  of   comfort  or  similar  letter,  or  an
approval  by  Government  of  a  borrowing  to  be  undertaken  by  another
entity shall not constitute a government guarantee or any other form of
legal  undertaking  of  Government.
(11)  Any amount due to be paid by Government under a guarantee
issued  under  this  Act  shall  be  charged  on  and  paid  out  of  the  Consoli-
dated  Fund  without  further  appropriation.
Government lending
67.(1)  Subject to article 181 of the Constitution, the Minister has the
sole authority to lend public funds on behalf of Government.
(2)  The Public Debt Management Office shall, before the grant of
a loan
(a)assess the credit risk to Government of providing the loan;
and
(b)propose the rate of interest to cover the cost and the credit
risk  of  Government.
(3)  The  Public  Debt  Management  Office  shall  submit  to  the
Minister,  in  writing,
(a)the result of the risk assessment;
(b)the method used in the assessment; and
(c)the  proposed  rate  of  interest.
(4)  The Minister shall enter into a government lending transaction
only where the risk assessment concludes that the borrower has the financial
ability to service the loan on the due date.
(5)   Unless otherwise determined by Parliament, the borrower shall
pay to Government, interest at a rate determined by the Minister to cover
the cost of the lending transaction and the credit risk of Government.
(6)  A  government  lending  transaction  shall  be  supported  by
appropriate  legal  documentation  executed  by  the  borrower  agreeing  to
service the debt obligation of that borrower under the transaction.
(7)  Where a borrower neglects or fails to service a debt obligation
under a government lending transaction, the Minister shall
(a)proceed  to  enforce  the  rights  of  Government  under  that
transaction,  and
(b)pursue any action necessary to recover from the borrower,
outstanding moneys owed to Government under the agree-
ment.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
43
  Act  921
Supplier’s credit agreements entered into by Government
68.(1)  Subject  to  article  181  of  the  Constitution,  the  Minister  shall
enter into supplier’s credit agreements.
(2)  The Public Debt Management Office shall, before the execution
of  a supplier’s credit agreement, assess the cost to Government of  entering
into  that  agreement.
(3)  The  assessment  of  cost  under  subsection  (2)  shall  include  a
comparison  with  other  available  financing  options.
(4)  The Public  Debt  Management  Office  shall  submit  to  the
Minister,  in  writing,
(a)the result of the assessment; and
(b)the  available  financing  options.
Finance lease agreements entered into by Government
69.(1)  Subject  to  article  181  of  the  Constitution,  the  Minister  has
the  sole  authority  to  enter  into  finance  lease  agreements  on  behalf  of
Government.
(2)  The Public Debt Management Office shall, before the execution
of a finance lease agreement, assess the cost to Government of entering
into  that  agreement.
(3)  The  assessment  of  cost  under  subsection  (2)  shall  include  a
comparison  with  other  available  financing  options.
(4)  The Public Debt Management Office shall submit to the Minister,
in  writing,
(a)the result of the assessment; and
(b)the  available  financing  options.
Record of government debt and finance arrangements
70.The Public Debt Management Office shall keep in a timely manner
and in an appropriate database, comprehensive and accurate records of
(a)outstanding  government  debts;
(b)derivative transactions entered into by Government;
(c)guarantees issued by Government;
(d)government  lending  transactions;
(e)finance lease agreements entered into by Government; and
(f)any  other  relevant  record  in  respect  of  Government  debt
obligation.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
44
Act  921
Publication of government debt and finance arrangements
71.(1)  The Public Debt Management Office shall, at least at half year
intervals,  prepare  statistical  bulletins  that  provide  accurate  and  timely
information  in  respect  of
(a)debt stocks, debt service cost and risk measures of  the debt
portfolio  of  Government;
(b)derivative transactions  entered into by Government;
(c)guarantees  issued  by  Government  and  the  purposes  and
beneficiaries of  these guarantees;
(d)lending provided by Government and the borrowers of the
funds;
(e)supplier’s  credit  agreements  entered  into  by  Government
and the purposes of the agreements;
(f)finance lease agreements entered into by Government, the
purposes  of   the  agreements,  and  the  counterparts  of
Government;  and
(g)financial terms of new agreements.
(2)  The  statistical  bulletin  referred  to  in  subsection  (1)  shall  be
published
(a)on the official website of Government;
(b)on the official website of the Ministry; and
(c)in any other medium determined by the Minister.
Annual report to Parliament
72.(1)   The Public Debt Management Office  shall, in respect of each
preceding year, prepare an annual report on
(a)borrowings  and  other  government  debt  management
operations,
(b)guarantee  and  lending  activities  of  Government,  and
(c)other finance arrangements entered into by Government.
(2)  The annual report shall include
(a)information  on  the  debt  management  strategy  and  the
rationale for the strategy;
(b)information  on  the  contribution  of  the  debt  management
strategy and the execution of the strategy in achieving the
debt management objectives under section 58;
(c)a  list  of  outstanding  government  debt;
(d)a list of  outstanding government guarantees, including

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
45
  Act  921
(i)the amount and beneficiaries of  the guarantees, and
(ii)   an  assessment  of  the  fiscal  risk  embedded  in  the
guarantees;
(e)a list of  lending operations, including outstanding amounts
and beneficiaries of the loans and an assessment of the credit
risk of the loans; and
(f)a  list  of   outstanding  supplier’s  credit  agreements  and
finance lease agreements and the financial terms of the agree-
ments.
(3)  The Minister shall
(a)review the annual report; and
(b)after notifying Cabinet, submit the report to Parliament not
later  than 31
st
 of  March each year.
Borrowing  by  local  government  authorities,  public  corporations  and
state-owned  enterprises
73.(1)  On  the  coming  into  force  of  this  Act,  borrowing  by  a  local
government  authority,  a  public  corporation  or  a  state-owned  enterprise
shall be in accordance with this Act.
(2)  An  enactment  in  force  on  the  coming  into  force  of  this  Act,
relating to borrowing by a local government authority, a public corpora-
tion  or  a  state-owned  enterprise,  shall  be  construed  with  the  necessary
modification to give effect to this Act.
(3)  A  local  government  authority,  public  corporation  or  state-
owned enterprise is liable for the debt and other obligations of that local
government authority, public corporation or state-owned enterprise with-
out  recourse  to  Government,  unless  otherwise  explicitly  guaranteed  by
Government in accordance with this Act.
Borrowing by local government authorities
74.(1)  Subject  to  subsection  (2)  and  without  limiting  section  73,  a
local government authority may borrow funds only
(a)from within the country, and
(b)up to the limit determined by the Minister in consultation
with the Minister responsible for Local Government,
and  consistent  with  the  medium  term  debt  strategy  and  annual  borrowing
and recovery plan.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
46
Act  921
(2)   A  local  government  authority  shall  obtain  prior  written
approval  of  the  Minister  for
(a)the issuance of debt securities to the public; or
(b)borrowing of an amount above the limit determined by the
Minister  under subsection (1).
Reporting requirements of local government authorities
75.(1)   A local government authority shall, not later than ten working
days from the date of signing a loan agreement, issuance of a debt security
or obtaining an overdraft, submit to the Minister a record of the transac-
tion.
(2)  A  local  government  authority  shall  submit  to  the  Minister
annually and upon request
(a)data on the total outstanding debt of that local government
authority;  and
(b)any other information that the Minister may specify.
  (3)  The  Public  Debt  Manaement  Office  shall  keep,  in  a  timely
manner  and  in  an  appropriate  database,  comprehensive  and  accurate
records  of  outstanding  local  government  debts.
Borrowing by public corporations and state-owned enterprises
76.(1)  Subject  to  subsection  (2)  and  without  limiting  section  73,  a
public  corporation  or  state-owned  enterprise  may  borrow  funds  up  to
the  limit  determined  by  the  Minister  and  consistent  with  the  annual
borrowing and recovery plan.
(2)  A public corporation or state-owned enterprise shall obtain the
prior  written  approval  of  the  Minister  in  respect  of
(a)borrowing of an amount above the limit determined by the
Minister under subsection (1); or
(b)borrowing  from  a  foreign  market.
(3)  For  purposes  of   this  section,  “foreign  market”  means  the
financial  market  that  represent  the  mechanisms  for  issuing  and  trading
securities of  an entity domiciled outside the country.
Reporting requirements of public corporations and state-owned enterprises
77.(1)  A public corporation or state-owned enterprise shall, not later
than  twenty  working  days  after  the  end  of   each  quarter,  submit  to  the
Minister a record of outstanding debt and new borrowings including over-
drafts and corporate debt securities issued.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
47
  Act  921
(2)   A  public  corporation  or  state-owned  enterprise  shall  submit
to the Minister annually and upon request
(a)a  record  of  the  total  outstanding  debt  and  borrowing
operations  of  that  public  corporation  or  state-owned
enterprise;  and
(b)any other record that the Minister may specify.
(3)  The Public Debt Management Office shall keep in a timely man-
ner and in an appropriate database, comprehensive and accurate records
of outstanding debts of public corporations and state-owned enterprises.
Power to appoint agents
78.(1)  The Minister may appoint issuing agents, registration agents,
primary  dealers  and  other  agents  to  facilitate  primary  and  secondary
market transactions in government debt securities.
(2)  Despite subsection (1), the Bank of Ghana may act as a fiscal
agent for Government to facilitate the issuance, management, redemption
and  repayment  of   government  securities,  on  the  terms  and  conditions
that may be agreed in a fiscal agency agreement.
(3)  A fiscal agency agreement under subsection (2) shall provide,
among  others,  for
(a)the duties and responsibilities of the Bank of Ghana;
(b)the  remuneration  due  the  Bank  of  Ghana  for  the  perfor-
mance  of  the  duties  and  responsibilities  under  paragraph
(a);  and
(c)any reporting required by the Minister.
(4)  For  purposes  of   this  section,  an  “issuing  agent”,  “registration
agent”, “primary dealer” and “other agents” referred to in subsection (1)
means  an  agent  appointed  in  accordance  with  the  Public  Procurement
Act, 2003 (Act 663) who acts on behalf of Government.
Accounts  and  Audit
Submission of financial statements
79.(1)  A  Principal  Spending  Officer  shall,  through  the  Principal
Account Holder
(a)prepare  and  submit  quarterly  financial  statements  to  the
Controller and Accountant-General by the 15th day of the
month following each quarter of  each financial year; and
(b)submit  any  other  relevant  report  within  the  time  that  the
Controller and Accountant-General may determine.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
48
Act  921
(2)  The  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall  prepare  and
submit a quarterly financial statement to the Minister by the end of the
month following the end of  each quarter.
Annual accounts
80.(1)   A Principal Spending Officer of a covered entity shall, within
two months after the end of  each financial year, prepare and submit to
the Auditor-General and Controller and Accountant-General, the accounts
and information set out in the Schedule.
(2)  A  Principal  Spending  Officer  of  a  public  corporation  shall,
within two months after the end of  each financial year,
(a)prepare,  in  the  format  determined  by  the  Controller  and
Accountant-General,  a  summary  statement  of  financial
performance  of  that  public  corporation;
(b)submit  the  summary  statement  to  the  Controller  and
Accountant-General and the Auditor-General; and
(c)submit a copy of  the summary statement to the Minister.
(3)  The accounts submitted under subsection (1) shall
(a)be prepared in accordance with accounting standards and
associated  policies;
(b)indicate the basis of accounting used in the preparation of
the accounts; and
(c)indicate  the  action  taken  by  the  covered  entity  as  regards
the  recommendations  of  Parliament  on  the  report  of  the
Auditor-General.
(4)  The  Auditor-General  shall  in  accordance  with  the  Audit
Service  Act,  2000  (Act  584)  examine  and  audit  the  accounts  submitted
under  this  section.
Consolidated annual accounts
81.(1)   The  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall,  within  three
months  after  the  end  of   each  financial  year,  prepare  and  submit  the
following consolidated accounts to the Minister and the Auditor-General:
(a)the consolidated annual accounts of Government including
the accounts specified in the Schedule;
(b)the accounts of the Contingency Fund; and
(c)the accounts of  the Petroleum Funds.
(2)  The  Controller  and  Accountant-General  shall,  in  respect  of
accounts submitted under subsection (1), indicate a defect, shortcoming
or any other factor which in the opinion of the Controller and Accountant-
General  materially  affects  the  responsibility  of  the  Minister  under  this
Act.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
49
  Act  921
Changes to accounting or classification system
82.The  Controller  and  Accountant-General
(a)may  introduce  changes  to  the  accounting  or  classification
system; but
(b)shall provide a justification in respect of
  (i)  the change; and
  (ii)  how  the  accounting  or  classification  system  intro-
duced  shall    ensure  that  public  funds  are  properly
accounted  for.
Internal audit
83.(1)  A covered entity shall have an Internal Audit Unit.
 (2)  The head of the Internal Audit Unit shall report administra-
tively  to  the  Principal  Spending  Officer  and  functionally  to  the  Audit
Committee  of   that  covered  entity.
  (3)  An Internal Auditor of the Internal Audit Unit of a covered
entity shall
(a)appraise  and  report  on  the  soundness  and  application  of
the system of  controls operating in the covered entity;
(b)evaluate the effectiveness of the risk management and gov-
ernance process of a  covered  entity and contribute to the
improvement  of  that  risk  management  and  governance
process;
(c)provide  assurance  on  the  efficiency,  effectiveness  and
economy  in  the  administration  of  the  programmes  and
operations  of  a  covered  entity;  and
  (d)evaluate  compliance  of   a  covered  entity  with  enactments,
policies, standards, systems and procedures.
(4)  The Internal Auditor  of a covered entity shall, in consultation
with the Principal Spending Officer of the respective covered entity and
in accordance with guidelines issued by the Internal Audit Agency, prepare
an  annual  audit  work  plan  of  the  activities  required  to  be  performed  by
the Internal Auditor in a financial year which is determined by the risk
assessment including the fiscal risk of  that covered entity.
(5)  The annual audit work plan, referred to under subsection (4),
includes an appraisal and report on
(a)budget planning and implementation, and compliance with
national  goals and objectives;
(b)the development initiatives of the covered entity;
(c)procurement of  goods, services and works;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
50
Act  921
(d)value for money on public expenditure;
(e)follow-ups  on  the  agreed  audit  recommendations  and
required  corrective actions;
(f)systems  of  government  revenue  collections  for  proper
accountability;  and
(g)proper,  timely  and  effective  use  of   Government  financial
information  systems.
(6)  The  Internal  Auditor  of  a  covered  entity  shall,  within  thirty
days after the beginning of  the financial year, submit
(a)the annual audit work plan to the Principal Spending Officer
of that covered entity and the Audit Committee established
under section 86; and
(b)a copy of the annual audit work plan to the Internal Audit
Agency.
 (7)  The Internal Auditor of a covered entity shall submit quarterly
reports  on  the  execution  of  the  annual  audit  work  plan  to  the  Principal
Spending  Officer  of   the  covered  entity  concerned,  the  Audit  Committee,
the  Auditor-General  and  the  Director-General  of  the  Internal  Audit
Agency.
(8)  The  Internal  Auditor  of  a  covered  entity  shall,  in  the  perfor-
mance of functions under this Act,
(a)have  access  to  information  and  property  required  to  be
audited;  and
(b)be provided with any relevant explanation required by the
Internal    Auditor.
(9)  The  Internal  Auditor  of  a  covered  entity  shall  report  to  the
Principal  Spending  Officer  concerned  any  incidents  of  suspected  fraud
or  misuse  of  public  funds.
(10)  Where the Internal Auditor of a covered entity suspects that
a  Principal  Spending  Officer  is  involved  in  fraud  or  misuse  of   public
funds, the Internal Auditor shall report the matter to the Director-General
of  the  Internal  Audit  Agency  who  shall  in  consultation  with  the  chair-
person  of   the  relevant  Audit  Committee  initiate  investigations  into  the
matter.
(11)  This section shall, so far as it relates to internal audit, be read
and construed as one with the Internal Audit Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658)

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
51
  Act  921
External audit
84.The Auditor-General shall, within six months after the end of each
financial  year,  examine  and  audit  the  public  accounts  submitted  under
this Act in accordance with article 187 of the Constitution and the Audit
Service Act, 2000 (Act 584).
Report  on  findings  and  recommendations
85.(1)  A  Principal  Spending  Officer  shall,  on  an  annual  basis,
submit the following to the Minister and Auditor-General:
(a)a  report  on  the  status  of  implementation  of  recommenda-
tions made by the Auditor-General in respect of that  covered
entity;  and
(b)a  report  on  the  status  of  implementation  of recommenda-
tions made by Parliament in respect of  that covered entity.
(2)  The  Attorney-General  shall,  on  an  annual  basis,  submit  a
report on the status of any action commenced on behalf of the Govern-
ment to the Minister, Auditor-General and Parliament following findings
of  the  Auditor-General  and  recommendations  of  the  Public  Accounts
Committee  of  Parliament.
Audit  Committees
Establishment of Audit Committee
86.(1)   There is established by this Act, an Audit Committee that shall
serve  one  particular  covered  entity  or  any  other  covered  entities  in  a
sector.
(2)  For the purpose of  subsection (1), the Minister shall, by Regu-
lations,  specify
(a)the number of Audit Committees to be established in each
sector;
(b)the qualification for appointment to an Audit Committee;
(c)the  funding  of  Audit  Committees;  and
(d)the procedure for meetings of  an Audit Committee.
Composition  of  Audit  Committee
87.(1)   An Audit Committee consists of five members.
(2)  The  majority  of  members  of  an  Audit  Committee  shall  be
independent  members.
(3)  The  Internal  Audit  Agency  and  the  Institute  of  Chartered
Accountants,  Ghana  shall  nominate  the  majority  of   members  from
among  persons  who  do  not  work  in  the  covered  entity  to  which  the

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
52
Act  921
Audit Committee relates and two other members shall be nominated by
the Principal Account Holder.
(4)  The chairperson of an Audit Committee shall be elected from
among the independent members of  the Committee.
(5)  Without limiting subsection (2), an Audit Committee may, in
the performance of its functions under this Act, co-opt a senior manage-
ment personnel to serve on the Audit Committee.
(6)  The  Principal  Account  Holder  shall  appoint  the  chairperson
and members of  an Audit Committee.
Functions of Audit Committee
88.(1)   An Audit Committee shall ensure that the head of a covered
entity, to which the Audit Committee relates,
(a)pursues  the  implementation  of  any  recommendation
contained  in
    (i)  an  internal  audit  report;
  (ii)  Parliament’s  decision  on  the  Auditor-General’s
report;
(iii)  Auditor-General’s  Management  Letter;  and
(iv)  the  report  of  an  internal  monitoring  unit  in  the
covered entity concerned particularly, in relation to
financial  matters  raised;  and
(b)prepares an annual statement showing the status of imple-
mentation  of  any  recommendation  contained  in
(i)an  internal  audit  report;
(ii)   Parliament’s  decision  on  the  Auditor-General’s
report;
(iii)  Auditor-General’s Management letter;
(iv)  the report on financial matters raised in an internal
monitoring  unit  of  a  covered  entity;  and
(v)   any  other  related  directive  of  Parliament.
(2)  An annual statement required under subsection (1) (b) shall
(a)indicate the remedial action taken or proposed to be taken
to  avoid  or  minimise  the  recurrence  of   an  undesirable
feature in the accounts and operations of a covered entity;
(b)indicate  the  period  for  the  completion  of  the  remedial
action;  and
(c)be endorsed by the relevant sector Minister and forwarded
to the Minister, Parliament, Office of  the President and the
Auditor-General  within  six  months  after  the  end  of  each
financial  year.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
53
  Act  921
Oversight  of  Local  Government  Authorities,  Public  Corporations  and  State-
Owned Enterprises
Submission  of  consolidated  audit  accounts  of local  government
authorities
89.The Minister responsible for Local Government shall, within nine
months  after  the  end  of   each  financial  year,  submit  to  the  Minister  a
statement  of  consolidated  audited  accounts  of  each  local  government
authority.
Duty of governing body of public corporation and state-owned enterprise
90.The governing body of a public corporation or state-owned enter-
prise shall establish and maintain
(a)policies,
(b)procedures,
(c)risk management and internal control systems, and
(d)governance  and  management  practices,
to ensure that that public corporation or state-owned enterprise manages
its  resources  prudently  and  operates  efficiently  in  accordance  with  the
objectives for which the public corporation or state-owned enterprise was
established.
Collection and receipt of moneys due to public corporations
91.
 (1)  The Board of Directors of a public corporation governed by
this Act shall ensure the efficient management of the financial resources
of the public corporation including the collection and receipt of  moneys
due  to  that  public  corporation.
 (2)  Where a public corporation wilfully or negligently fails to ensure
that moneys due to that public corporation are collected or received, the
Minister  shall,  upon  the  recommendation  of  the  Auditor-General,
withdraw or suspend the emoluments of  the members of  the governing
body of  the public corporation, either jointly or severally.
Removal of directors of a public corporation
92.(1)   A person appointed by the Government as a director of a public
corporation who fails to report on the operations of that public corpora-
tion to the Minister as required under section 80 shall be removed from
office.
(2)  The procedure for the removal of  a director in the Civil Service,
as set out in the Civil Service Act, 1993 (P.N.D.CL. 327), applies to the
removal of a director of a public corporation under subsection (1).

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
54
Act  921
Annual financial plan of public corporations and state-owned enterprises
93.(1)  The  governing  body of  a  public  corporation  or  state-owned
enterprise shall, not later than four months before the beginning of each
financial year, submit to the Minister through the relevant sector Minister,
a  financial  plan  reflecting  the  proposed  revenue  and  expenditure
estimate  of  that  public  corporation  or  state-owned  enterprise  in  respect
of  the ensuing financial year.
(2)  The  governing  body  of  a  public  corporation  or  state-owned
enterprise shall, at the end of every quarter and at any other time that the
Minister and relevant sector minister may determine, report to them on
(a)operations  of  that  public  corporation  or  state-owned
enterprise in relation to its approved business plan for the
year; and
(e)any other matter that the Minister may specify as a matter
to be included in the report.
Financial directives to public corporations and state-owned enterprises
94.(1)  The Minister may issue a financial directive to a public corpo-
ration  or  state-owned  enterprise  requesting  that  public  corporation  or
state-owned enterprise to
(a)provide  financial  information  that  the  Minister  may
specify;  and
(b)submit to a special audit or review by a person appointed
by the  Minister.
(2)  A  public  corporation  or  state-owned  enterprise  shall  comply
with a financial directive issued under subsection (1).
(3)   A  financial  directive  issued  under  subsection  (1)  shall  be
disclosed  in  the  annual  report  of  the  public  corporation  or  state-owned
enterprise  concerned,  covering  the  year  in  which  the  directive  was
received.
(4)  The  annual  report  referred  to  under  subsection  (3)  shall
indicate the extent to which the public corporation or state-owned enter-
prise concerned complied with the directive.
Accounts and audit of public corporations and state-owned enterprises
95.The  governing  body of  a  public  corporation  or  a  state-owned
enterprise shall
(a)cause  to  be  prepared,  not  later  than  two  months  after  the
end of  each financial year, an annual account in respect of
that financial year; and

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
55
  Act  921
(b)submit to the Minister, not later than four months after the
end of  each  financial year, an audited financial statement.
Miscellaneous Provisions
Offences and penalties
96.(1)   A person, acting in an office or employment connected with
the  procurement  or  control  of   Government  stores,  or  the  collection,
management or disbursement of amounts in respect of a public fund or a
public trust who
(a)makes an unauthorised commitment resulting in a financial
obligation  for  the  Government,
(b)fails to collect moneys due to the Government,
(c)is responsible for any improper payment of public funds or
payment  of  money  that  is  not  duly  verified  in  line  with
existing  procedures,
(d)is responsible for any deficiency in or for the loss, damage
or  destruction  of   any  public  funds,  stamp,  security,  stores
or any other Government property,
(e)accepts or receives money or valuable consideration for the
performance of  an official duty,
(f)in  relation  to  the  duties  of  that  person,  willfully  makes  or
signs a false certificate, false return or false entry in a book,
or
(g)fails to report knowledge or information in respect of fraud
committed  by  a  person  against  the  Government,  contrary
to any enactment related to public financial management,
to the appropriate authority or law enforcement authority
commits  an  offence  and  is  liable  on  summary  conviction  to  a  term  of
imprisonment of not less than six months and not more than five years
or to a fine of not less than one hundred penalty units and not more than
two thousand, five hundred penalty units or to both.
(2)   A person, acting in an office or employment connected with
the  procurement  or  control  of   Government  stores,  or  the  collection,
management or disbursement of amounts in respect of a public fund or
a  public  trust  who  authorises  an  expenditure  exceeding  the  approved
appropriation  in  the  relevant  budget  commits  an  offence  and  is  liable  on
summary conviction to a term of  imprisonment  of  not less than six months
and not more than twelve months or to a fine of not more than the value
of the assessed impact of the commitment or to both.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
56
Act  921
(3)   A person who promises, offers or gives money or any other
valuable consideration to another person, acting in an office or employ-
ment,
(a)connected with the procurement or control of government
stores,
(b)connected with the collection, management or disbursement
of amounts in respect of a  public fund or  a public trust, or
(c)with the intent to influence
(i)a decision or action on any question or matter that
is  pending  or  is  likely  to  be  brought  before  the
person in an official capacity, or
(ii)   a person to commit fraud against the Government
or to connive with, take part in or allow an oppor-
tunity  for  the  commission  of  the  fraud
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of  not
more  than  three  times  the  amount  offered  or  accepted  or  a  term  of
imprisonment of not less than six months and not more than two years
or to both.
Surcharge
97.(1)   Where the Minister, after due inquiry, is satisfied that
(a)a loss  or deficit in public funds that has been advanced to
or is under the control of  a public officer, or
(b)a  loss  or  damage  to  public  property  under  the  care  of  a
public  officer,
is  occasioned  as  a  result  of  the  negligence  or  misconduct  of  that  public
officer, or the negligence or misconduct of  that public officer contributed
to the loss or deficit in public funds or loss or damage to public property,
the amount of the loss or deficit or value of the property lost or damaged
or the cost of replacing or repairing the damage to the property becomes
a debt due to the Government and shall be recovered through an admin-
istrative procedure or through a court action.
(2) Where the negligence or misconduct of the public officer only
contributed  to  the  loss  or  deficit  in  public  funds  or  loss  or  damage  to
public  property,  the  amount  recoverable  from  the  public  officer  under
subsection (1) may be restricted to an amount that the Minister, after due
inquiry,  considers  just  and  equitable  having  regard  to  the  contribution
the public officer made to the loss, deficit or damage.
(3)    For  purposes  of   this  section,  a  “public  officer”  includes  a
person who has previously occupied a public office.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
57
  Act  921
Penalty for contravention of this Act
98.(1)   A person who
(a)refuses  or  fails  to  produce  or  submit  any  information
required under this Act,
(b)issues a local purchase order outside the Ghana Integrated
Financial  Management  Information  System  or  any  other
electronic platform in use by Government,
(c)misuses  or  permits  the  misuse  of  any  Government
property which results in a loss of  public resources,
(d)contravenes  or  knowingly  permits  another  person  to
contravene a provision of  this Act or the Regulations, or
(e)instigates another person to contravene a provision  of  this
Act  or the Regulations,
commits an offence and where no penalty is provided for the offence, is
liable on summary conviction to a fine of  not less than  one hundred and
fifty penalty units and not more than two hundred and fifty penalty units
or to a term of imprisonment of not less than six months and not more
than two years or to both.
(2)    A  person  who  contravenes  subsection  (1)  is,  in  addition  to
the penalty specified in that subsection
(a)liable for any liability contracted on behalf of Government
as a result of  the contravention; and
(b)subject  to  disciplinary  action  by  Government  including
dismissal,  demotion  or  suspension.
Waiver of sovereign immunity
99.Where the Minister is satisfied that it is in the public interest, the
Minister may, in connection with a borrowing governed by foreign law,
(a)in  accordance  with  the  Constitution  and  any  other  enact-
ment,  and
(b)with  the  prior  approval  of  Parliament
waive  any  right  of  the  Government  to  claim  sovereign  immunity  from
proceedings in a foreign court to settle any disputes, and with respect to
its assets.
Fiscal impact analysis of legislation and proposals
100.(1)  Any  legislation  to  be  laid  before  Parliament  or  proposal
submitted  for  the  approval  of  Parliament  shall  be  accompanied  by  a
fiscal impact analysis stating the estimated effect on revenues and expen-
ditures  for  the  financial  year  in  which  the  legislation  or  proposal  is
expected to come into effect.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
58
Act  921
(2)  The fiscal impact analysis shall be prepared and submitted in
accordance with the Regulations.
Regulations
101.(1) The  Minister  may,  by  legislative  instrument,  make  Regula-
tions
(a)for the operation of a public account;
(b)for  the  recording  and  controlling  of  expenditure  commit-
ments and payments;
(c)for the management of Government assets;
(d)for the management of Government debts;
(e)for  Audit  Committees;
(f)for claims and write offs of public funds;
(g)for the period within which a covered entity shall close all
bank accounts opened  by the covered entity before the  coming
into force of this Act;
(h)for  the  limit  on  borrowing  by  local  government  authori-
ties;
(i)for the limit on borrowing by public corporations and state-
owned  enterprises;
(j)for penalties under this Act;
(k)for  the  implementation  of     the  Treasury  Single  Account
established under section 46 particularly in respect of
 (i)   the scope of  the Treasury Single Account,
(ii)the structure of  subaccounts of  the Treasury Single
Account,
(iii)  the compliance  procedures  required  of  covered
entities and the Consolidated Fund;
(l)prescribing the method for the preparation, evaluation and
execution of  investment projects under section 33;
(m)prescribing the manner in which the Minister may, approve,
abandon  or  remit
 (i)   claims by or on behalf of Government, or
(ii)service to the Government, and
(n)any other matters that are necessary for the effective imple-
mentation  of  this  Act.
(2)  The Minister may,  in consultation with the Public Procure-
ment  Authority,  by  legislative  instrument,  make  Regulations  governing
the acquisition, receipt, custody, control, issue and disposal of  Govern-
ment  stores.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
59
  Act  921
Interpretation
102.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
“accounting  standards  “mean  authoritative  statements
adopted  by  the  Controller  and  Accountant-General,
indicating  how  particular  types  of  transactions  and  other
events  are  to  be  reflected  in  the  accounts  and  financial
statements of a covered entity;
“appropriation”  means  an  authorisation  made  under  an
Appropriation  Act  permitting  withdrawal  out  of   the
Consolidated Fund or any other public fund;
“Appropriation Act” means an Act passed in accordance with
article 179 of  the Constitution, which authorises withdrawal
out of the Consolidated Fund or any other public funds for
a financial year;
“approved  financial  institution”  means  an  establishment
licensed to deal in financial transactions;
“arrears” means any payment which has not been made on  its
due date;
“Auditor-General”  means  the  person  appointed  as  Auditor-
General under article 187 of the Constitution;
“autonomous agency” means a self-governing body established
by the  Government that is responsible for  making binding
decisions  and  developing  its  strategic  plans  without  inter-
ference or with limited interference from the Government;
“baseline  parameters”  means  an  agreed  description  of  the
attributes  of  a  product,  within  a  specific  period  where  the
agreed description serves as a basis for defining change to
the  product;
“borrowing”  means
  (a)raising funds by concluding loan agreements,
  (b)obtaining  advances  by  overdrafts,  and
  (c)issuing  debt  securities;
  “borrowing  instrument”  includes  a  loan  agreement  and  an
agreement to use overdraft facilities or securities;
 “budget” means the Government plan of revenue and  expen-
diture for a financial year;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
60
Act  921
“budgeting” means the process by which Government sets lev-
els to efficiently collect revenue and  allocate the spending
of resources among all sectors to meet  national objectives;
“cash management bill” means a debt security of the Govern-
ment  with a tenor of seven to twenty one days;
“capital expenditure” means  any expenditure for the creation
or acquisition of  a fixed asset, inventory or other valuable
physical stock which is not expended within the year;
“central government” means units of government that exercise
authority over the economy of the country;
“Chief  Director”  means  the  Chief  Director  of  the  Ministry;
 “commitment” in reference to a covered entity ,means a con-
tract  or  other  binding  arrangement  which  creates  a  future
expense or liability;
“Consolidated Fund” means the Consolidated Fund established
under  article  176  of  the  Constitution;
“consolidated  public  account”  means  the  process  of  eliminat-
ing  transactions  between  different  ministries,  agencies  or
units  of  government  and  combining  in  a  common  set  of
categories  the  sum  of  the  external  transactions  of  the
ministries,  agencies  or  units  to  and  from  the  rest  of   the
economy;
“Controller  and  Accountant-General”  means  the  person
appointed  under  section  6  or  an  officer  acting  on  the
authority of the Controller and Accountant- General;
“covered entities” means
(a)the Executive, Legislature  and Judiciary;
(b)constitutional    bodies;
(c)Ministries,  Departments    Agencies  and  local
government  authorities;
(d)the public service;
(e)autonomous  agencies;  and
(f)statutory  bodies;
“debt” includes a financial liability created by
(a)borrowing,
(b)credits accepted under supplier’s credit agreements,
(c)the issuance of  debt securities, and

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
61
  Act  921
(d)assumption  of  the  payment  obligations  under  a
guaranteed  loan;
“debt management operations” include
(a)preparation  of  medium-term  debt  management
strategies  to  achieve  the  debt  management  objec-
tives,
(b)preparation of annual borrowing and recovery plans
based on the  determined strategy;
(c)borrowings and other market transactions to achieve
the strategic goals; and
(d)debt  data  recording  and  other  debt  administration
activities, and preparation of  reports and statistical
bulletins on debt and debt management;
“debt management strategy” means a strategic plan designed to
make  operational  the  high-level  objectives  for  debt  man-
agement,  taking  into  account  the  cost  and  risk  associated
with the public debt portfolio, which specifies the borrowing
requirements  of  government  and  how  the  borrowing
requirement  of  government  is  financed  over  a  number  of
years;
“debt market” means an environment in which the issuance and
trading  of  debt  securities  occur;
“debt  portfolio”  means  a  combination  of   debt  instruments,
often  classified  in  accordance  with  the  share  of  particular
currencies,  and  the  types  and  rates  of   interest  held  by
Government;
“debt securities” mean
(a)legal  documents  as  evidence  of  debt  issued  by  the
Government in electronic format or hard copy to a
named  person;
(b)negotiable or non-negotiable bearer instruments;
(c)promissory  notes,  IOU  undertakings  and  similar
financial  instruments;
“economic  classification”  means  the  type  of  expenditure  by
Government  in  respect  of  compensation,  goods  and
services and capital expenditure;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
62
Act  921
“expenditure” means a non-repayable and a non-repaying pay-
ment by Government, whether requited or unrequited and
whether for current or capital purposes;
“financial assets” means money at hand, or money that is easily
accessible,  in  the  form  of   cash  deposit,  cheque,  loan,
account  receivable,  and  marketable  securities  such  as
deposits,  loans,  bonds,  financial  derivatives,  and  accounts
receivable;
“finance lease “ means an arrangement between two parties by
which  the  lessor  undertakes  to  lease  to  the  lessee  for  the
lessee’s  use  only  and  against  payment  of   mutually  agreed
lease rentals over a specified non-cancellable period,
(a)the lessor’s own already acquired assets, or
(b)an asset that the lessor agrees to acquire from a third
party, known as the supplier, chosen and specified
by the lessee so that the lessor retains full title to the
asset during the period of  the lease,
and  under  which,  subject  to  agreement  by  the  lessor,  the
lessee may exercise an option to purchase the asset outright
after  the  period  of  the  lease  at  a  price  agreed  on  by  the
parties,
“financial  management  system”  means  the  methodology  and
software that   the Government uses to oversee and govern
its income, expenses and assets for purposes of  optimising
financial  management,  reporting  and  sustainability;
“financial year” means a period of twelve months commencing
on  the1st  day  of   January  and  ending  on  the  31st  day  of
December;
“financing  estimates”  means  a  list  of  all  sources  of  funds  by
which the budget deficit will be financed;
“financial  swap”  means  an  agreement  in  which  two  parties
exchange  cash  flows  of   one  party’s  financial  instruments
for those of  the other party’s financial instrument;
“fiscal agent” an institution or organisation such as a bank or
financial  institution  that  acts  on  behalf  of  government
performing  various  financial  duties  including  the  redemp-
tion of  bonds, coupons, handling tax issues, replacement of
lost or damaged securities and other finance related tasks;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
63
  Act  921
“fiscal policy” means  the means by which Government policies
are implemented with respect to revenue, expenditure and
debt  management;
“fiscal  policy  document”  means  an  outline  of   the  revenue,
expenditure,  financing  and  debt  management  decisions  of
Government that influences the economy;
  “fiscal  policy  objective”  means  the  targets  that  Government
seeks to achieve on the implementation of a fiscal policy;
“fiscal risk” means a risk arising from an unforeseen macroeco-
nomic  scenario  such  as  external  shock,  natural  disaster,
fluctuation in the value of  Government assets,  commodities
or  guarantees and other contingent liabilities;
“fiscal risk statement” means a statement that the Government
issues  periodically  on  the  nature  of  fiscal  risk  over  the
medium term or any other specific period;
“fixed asset” means a long term resource controlled by a covered
entity,  public  corporation  or  state  owned  enterprise  as  a
result  of  past  events  and  from  which  future  economic
benefits are expected to flow to the entity;
“forecast  fiscal  balance”  means  a  statement  issued  by  the
Government  in  respect  of  the  expected  amount  of  money
which Government has accrued from tax revenue and the
proceeds  of  assets  sold  minus  any  Government  spending
over a fiscal year or any other specific period;
“foreign market” means the financial market that represents the
mechanism  for  issuing  and  trading  securities  of  entities
outside  the  country;
“Ghana  Integrated  Financial  Management  Information
System”  means  the  electronic  platform  used  by  the
Government  to
(a)manage commitments made against appropriation,
(b)process payment claims,
(c)record revenue and expenditure transactions, and
(d)produce  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  financial
reports;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
64
Act  921
“Government”  means  any  authority  by  which  the  executive
authority of the Republic is exercised;
“Government  cash  management”  means  the  strategy  and
associated  process  adopted  by  Government  for  purposes
of  managing  cost  effectively  in  respect  of  the  short  term
cash flows and short term cash balances of government;
“Government debt” means a financial claim on the Government
that  requires  payment  by  the  Government  of  the  principal
sum or the principal and interest to a creditor;
“Government  property”  means  all  movable  and  non-movable
assets  or  chattels  owned  by  Government  including  land,
buildings, plant, vehicles, machinery and equipment;
“guarantee”  means  an  explicit  undertaking  by  the  issuer  to
guarantee  fulfillment  of  a  financial  obligation  for  which
the guarantee is issued;
  “internally  generated  funds”  means  revenue  generated    from
the  activities  of  a  covered  entity  from  its  operations  other
than taxes collected by the Ghana Revenue Authority;
“inventories”  mean
(i)assets in the form of materials or supplies to be
consumed  in  the  production  process;
(ii)assets in the form of materials or supplies to be
consumed  or  distributed  in  the  rendering  of
services;  and
(iii)assets  held  for  sale  or  distribution  in  the
ordinary  course  of  operations;
“investment” means an expenditure on the creation or acquisi-
tion of  fixed assets, inventories, valuable physical stocks or
securities;
“liability” includes
(a)a  liability  measured  in  accordance  with  generally
accepted accounting practice, or
(b)a liability that is contingent on an uncertain future
event depending on the circumstances of each case;
“liquidity buffer” means funds set aside by Government to take
care of shortfalls in Government financing in the short term;
“local government authority” means a Metropolitan, Municipal,
or  District  Assembly  as  defined  under  the  Local  Govern-
ment Act,1993 (Act 462);

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
65
  Act  921
“macro fiscal risk” has the meaning assigned to fiscal risk;
“market  transaction”  means  an  order  placed  by  an  insider,
after the appropriate documentation has been filed, to buy
or sell restricted securities openly on an exchange market;
“medium-term” means a period of not less than three years but
not more than five years;
“Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework”  means  an  annual,
rolling  three-year  expenditure  planning  that  sets  out  the
medium term expenditure priorities and hard budget con-
straints  against  which  sector  plans  may  be  developed  and
refined to match available resources;
  “Medium-Term  Fiscal  Framework”  means  an  annual  rolling
three year period over which the Government plans fiscal
policy  and  likely  budget  parameters  to  macroeconomic
performance;
“Medium  Term  National  Development  Plan”  means  a  set  of
comprehensive  development  programmes,  activities  and
projects  initiated  by  the  Government  through  covered
entities  to  support  and  give  direction  to  Government
efforts;
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for Finance;
“Ministry” means the Ministry responsible for Finance;
“monetary  grants”  means  non-repayable  funds  received  by  a
covered  entity  from  an  individual,  body  or  institution  for
use by the covered entity;
“monetary policy objective”  means
(i)exchange rate and interest rate management that has
no direct relation to fiscal policy but may be affected
by fiscal policy operations; and
(ii)goals  that  the  credit  control  measures  adopted  by
the Bank of Ghana seek to achieve;
“multi-year ceilings” means the explicit commitment of Govern-
ment to limit expenditure within the established maximum
level  of  expenditure  for  a  period  of  more  than  twelve
months;
“multi-year contract” means a contract for the purchase of  goods,
works,  supplies  or  services  for  a  period  of   more  than  one
program  year;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
66
Act  921
“multi-year  expenditure  commitment”  means  a  contract,
transaction,  or  agreement  that  binds  the  Government  to  a
financial commitment for more than one financial year or
which  results  in  a  contingent  liability,  except  where  the
financial commitment or contingent liability is authorised by
Parliament;
“other entities” means a private institution, an organisation or
a company that is of interest to Government in respect of
achievement  of  its  policies;
  “petroleum  funds”  means  the  Petroleum  Holding  Fund,  the
Ghana  Stabilisation  Fund,  the  Ghana  Heritage  Fund  and
subsequently, the Ghana Petroleum Wealth Fund;
“petroleum revenue” includes
(a)royalties  in  cash  or  in  equivalent  barrels  of  oil  or
equivalent units of  gas, payable by a licensed producer,
including  the  national  oil  company  or  a  company
under  a  Production  Sharing  Agreement  or  other
agreement,
(b)corporate income taxes payable by licensed upstream
and  mainstream  operators,
(c)participating  interest,
(d)additional  oil  entitlements,
(e)dividends  from  the  national  oil  company  for
Government’s  equity  interest,
(f)the  investment  income  derived  from  accumulated
petroleum  funds,
(g)surface rentals paid by licensed producers, or
(h)any  other  revenue  determined  by  the  Minister  to
constitute  petroleum  revenue,  derived  from
upstream  and  midstream  petroleum  operations;
“prepayment”  means  the  settlement  of  a  debt  or  installment
payment before its official due date;
“Principal  Account  Holder”  means  the  sector  Minister  or  the
political head of a covered entity;
“Principal  Spending  Officer”  in  relation  to  a  covered  entity,
means  the  Chief   Director,  Chief   Executive  or  the  most
senior administrative head responsible for producing outputs;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
67
  Act  921
“property”  means
(a)a book, paper, an account or a document that is used,
received or in the possession of a person employed
to  collect or manage the revenue of Government;
or
(b)moneys  or  valuable  securities  of  Government  that
is  in  the  possession  of  a  person  in  the  course  of
employment  of  that  person;
“public accounting record” means a record that is classified as
an account including manual and electronic record, a book,
ledger, ledger sheet, ledger card, or machine tabulation and
voucher,  schedule,  returns,  bank  statement  or  any  other
statement;
“public  accounts”  mean  the  financial  statements,  notes  and
reports pertaining to money received into, held in, and paid
from  public  funds;
“public  corporation”  means  a  body  corporate  established
under an Act of Parliament in accordance with article 192
of  the  Constitution;
“public  finances”  means  the  income  and  expenditures  of  a
public  sector  organisation;
“public financial management system” means legal and admin-
istrative  procedures  established  to  permit  covered  entities
to conduct activities in a manner that ensures correct usage
of   public  funds  to  meet  defined  standards  of   probity,
regularity, efficiency and effectiveness;
“public funds” means the Consolidated Fund, the Contingency
Fund and any other fund established by or under an Act of
Parliament;
“public  money”  includes  tax  revenue,  non  tax  revenue,  grants
and other receipts;
“public  office”  
includes  an  office  the  emoluments  attached  to
which  are  paid  directly  from  the  Consolidated  Fund  or
directly  out  of  moneys  provided  by  Parliament  and  an
office in a public corporation cstablished entirely out of  public
funds or moneys provided by Parliament;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
68
Act  921
“public  officer”  includes  the  holder  of  a  public  office  and  a
person appointed to act in that office;
“Public Procurement Authority” means the Public Procurement
Authority  established  under  the  Public  Procurement  Act,
2003 (Act 663);
“public  resources”  mean  public  revenue  including  revenue
acquired  through  donation,  bequest,  borrowing,  movable
and fixed asset, deposit, receivables and rights;
“public service” includes  service in any civil office of Govern-
ment, the emoluments attached to which are paid directly
from  the  Conslolidated  Fund  or  directly  out  of  moneys
provided by Parliament and service with a public corpora-
tion;
“public trust” means moneys raised or received in trust for or
on  behalf  of  the  Government;
 “resources” means the amount of  money, material, staff, aid,
financial  assistance,  technical  assistance  and  other  assets
available to an entity to enable it carry out its functions;
“resource  envelope”  means  the  overall  financial  resources
available to Government for the fiscal year;
“sector Minister” means the Minister with oversight responsi-
bility  for  the  public  corporation  or  state-owned  enterprise
concerned;
“short-term” means a period of not more than three years;
“state-owned enterprise” means an entity whether incorporated
or  not  under  the  Companies  Act,  1963  (Act  179)  whose
shares are wholly or partially held or controlled by Govern-
ment;
 “statutory expenditure” means an expenditure charged on the
Consolidated  Fund  by  the  Constitution  or  by  an  Act  of
Parliament  otherwise  than  expenditure  of  moneys  appro-
priated  or  granted  by  an  Appropriation  Act  or  a  Supple-
mentary  Appropriation  Act;
“spending plan” means a strategy document that contains  the
cash flow of a covered entity of Government;
  “subvention”  means  the  appropriation  of  funds  to  a  covered
entity for onward transfer to an entity which is not a covered
entity;

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
69
  Act  921
 “Supplementary Appropriation Act” means an Act passed in
accordance with article 179 of the Constitution the purpose
of which is to supplement an appropriation granted under
an  Appropriation  Act;
 “supplier’s credit agreement” means a credit arrangement that
includes  payment  of  interest  between  a  purchaser  and  a
supplier of  any goods, works  or services that gives the purchaser
the  right  to  fully  pay  for  the  goods,  works  or  services  at  a
future  date  extending  beyond  one  year  from  the  date  the
goods, works  or services were supplied;
 “Treasury Single Account” means a consolidated bank account
system  where  all  deposit  and  payments  transactions  are
processed for central government;
“unexpended” means a budgetary appropriation based on which
commitment has been made and expenditure incurred but
not yet paid by the end of the financial year;
“virement”  means  the  reallocation  of  funds  within  the  budget
from one budget line to another budget line; and
“warrant” means the authority to commit government.
Repeals and savings
103.(1)   The following Acts are repealed:
(a)the Financial Administration Act, 2003 (Act 654); and
(b)the Loans Act, 1970 (Act 335).
  (2)  Section  16(8)  of  the  Internal  Audit  Agency  Act,  2003
(Act 658) is repealed.
  (3)  Section  30  of  the  Audit  Service  Act,  2000  (Act  584)  is
repealed.
  (4)  Despite  the  repeal  of  the  enactments  in  subsection  (1),  the
Regulations, orders, rules and instructions relating to the administration
of  public finance, government stores and public corporation other than
that  set  up  for  commercial  purposes  made  or  done  under  the  repealed
enactments  shall  continue  to  have  effect  as  if   made  or  done  under  this
Act with the necessary modification until the Regulations, orders, rules
and  instructions  are  revoked,  reviewed,  cancelled,  withdrawn  or  termi-
nated by Regulations, orders or  directives under this Act.
  (5)  Despite  the  repeal  of  the  enactments  in  subsection  (1),  any
borrowing,  lending  or  guarantee  issued  by  Government  or  any  other

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
70
Act  921
transaction entered into for and on behalf of the Government under any
of  the  repealed  enactments  or  Regulations  made  under  the  repealed
enactment shall
(a)be considered to have been done under this Act; and
(b)continue  in  force  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the
transaction  until  maturity  or  expiry.
 (6)   Despite the repeal of the enactments in subsections (2) and
(3), a report or a statement submitted under section 16 (8) of the Internal
Audit Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658) or section 30 of the Audit Service Act,
2000 (Act 584) shall be considered to have been submitted under this Act.
Transitional provisions
104.(1)  An internal audit officer or a public officer performing  internal
audit work in a covered entity immediately before the coming into force
of this Act shall on the coming into force of this Act be deemed to consti-
tute the members of the Internal Audit Unit for purposes of this Act.
(2) Despite  subsection  (1),  a  public  officer  performing  internal
audit  duties  in  a  covered  entity  may  be  reassigned  to  an  internal  audit
unit  that  the  appointing  authority  may  determine.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
71
  Act  921
SCHEDULE
Accounts to be submitted
(section 80 and 81)
Accounts to be submitted by the Controller and Accountant-General
1.The Controller and Accountant-General shall submit the following
accounts to the Minister and the Auditor-General:
(a)a balance sheet showing the consolidated assets and liabilities
of  all  public  funds;
(b)a consolidated statement of the cash flow for all public funds
and  any  other  entity  of  central  Government  showing  the
revenues, expenditures and financing for the financial year;
(c)a  balance  sheet  showing  the  assets  and  liabilities  of  the
central  Government;
(d)a  statement  of  the  cash  flow  for  the  central  Government
showing  the  revenues,  expenditures  and  financing  of   the
Consolidated Fund for the financial year;
(e)a summary statement of  revenue and expenditure, being a
summary of all the statements signed by the Principal Spending
Officer  under  subparagraph  (a)  and  (c)  of  paragraph  (2);
(f)relevant notes to the account; and
(g)any other statement that Parliament may require.
Accounts to be submitted by Principal Spending Officer
2.A  Principal  Spending  Officer  shall  submit  the  following  accounts
to the Controller and Accountant-General:
(a)an  appropriation  account,  signed  by  the  Principal  Spending
Officer,  showing
  (i)   the  services  for  which  the  moneys  expended  were
voted,
(ii)the sums actually expended on each service, and
(iii)the state of each covered entity compared with the
amount  appropriated
for that covered entity by Parliament;
(b)a statement signed by the Principal Spending Officer in the
form  that  the  Controller  and  Accountant-General  may
direct,  containing

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
72
Act  921
  (i)   the  amount  of  commitments  outstanding  for  the
supply  of   goods,  works  and  services  at  the  end  of
the financial year, and
 (ii)any  other  information  that  the  Controller  and
Accountant-General may require;
(c)a statement of revenues received and signed by the Principal
Spending Officer in the form the Controller and Accountant-
General may direct, showing
(i)the  amount  contained  in  the  estimates  of  revenue
for each source of  revenue,
(ii)the amount actually collected, and
(ii)   an explanation for any variation between the revenues
actually collected  and the amount estimated;
(d)a  statement  of  arrears  of  revenue  signed  by  the  Principal
Spending Officer  which
(i)indicates the amount outstanding at the end of the
financial year for each source of  revenue, and
(ii)contains  information  in  the  form  that  the  Controller
and Accountant-General may direct, and which shall
be submitted as a nil return where appropriate;
(e)a  statement  of   assets,  signed  by  the  Principal  Spending
officer,  indicating
  (i)   details  and  values  of  the  unallocated  stores  under
the control of the Principal Spending Officer at the
end of  the financial year, and
(ii)   details  and  values  of  any  other  classes  of  assets
under the control of  the Principal Spending Officer,
as  the  Controller  and  Accountant-General  may
determine;
(f)a statement of  performance, signed by the Principal Spending
Officer,  indicating  each  class  of   output  provided  during
the year, which shall
(i)compare  the  performance  with  the  forecast  of  the
performance contained in the estimates laid before
Parliament;  and

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
73
  Act  921
(ii)give  the  particulars  of  the  extent  to  which  the
performance  criteria  specified  in  that  estimate  in
relation to the provision of those outputs was satisfied;
and
(g) any other statements, in the form that the Controller and
Accountant-General  may require.
Date  of  Gazette notification:      26th  August,  2016.

Public Financial Management Act, 2016
74
Act  921
GPCL, ASSEMBLY PRESS, ACCRA. GPCL/A656/1,500/08/2016
Website: www.ghpublishingcompany.com  E-mail: info@ghpublishingcompany.com