5.5% from employee's basic salaryGHS 82.50
13% of employee's basic salary 
(to be provided by employer) 
GHS 195.00
Total 18.5% Social Security contribution 
(add 13% of employee's basic salary to the 5.5% ) 
GHS 277.50
”
The adage “make hay while the sun shines" made 
meaning to me when I finally retired after 31 years 
of active service.
I had worked all my life at AngloGold Ashanti, then 
Obuasi Gold Mines. I was a Mineral Processing 
Engineer at the processing plant from January 
1984 to November 2015. 
Luckily for me, my employer understood the 
importance of paying SSNIT contributions on 
behalf of their employees so we can retire in 
dignity. 
I also signed up to the SSNIT web portal when it 
was introduced so I could check my Statement 
regularly. One time, I found out that there were 
gaps in my SSNIT statement. I went to the SSNIT 
Obuasi branch to check and I was given a form 
to send to the Human Resource Department of 
AngloGold Ashanti. The HR officer completed the 
I was engaged by Ghana Textile Printing (GTP) 
in 1997 as a Textile designer, where I worked for 
23 years. My employer registered me on to the 
SSNIT Scheme and contributions were made 
regularly on my behalf.
I was very strong and healthy. However, in 
2008, I started facing some health challenges 
until around 2019, when my health rendered 
me ineffective on the job. Based on my doctor’s 
report, I was retired on medical grounds on  
2
nd
 December 2020. 
On 15
th
 May 2021, I reluctantly submitted my  
application to SSNIT, together with my medical 
report and retirement letter from my employer, 
for my entitlement. I said reluctantly because, I 
had a preconceived notion it wasn’t going to be 
easy or possible for me to get my benefit since 
I was not yet 60 years. To my surprise, I was 
welcomed with warmth and professionalism. 
SSNIT has done so many things for me and I have 
to be grateful. I lost my wife years ago and the 
pain was immense. After the mourning period, we 
went to SSNIT and we were paid a lump sum.
Later, I lost my only sibling. She worked for  
10 years with the government sector and died 
while in service. She had three children. I was not 
expecting anything from SSNIT, but when we 
put in an application, what was paid to us was a 
big surprise. SSNIT paid considerable amounts of 
money to the three children, which they invested 
in their businesses. After my sister’s death, I 
knew her children were my responsibility but with 
the payment from SSNIT, they are now running 
successful businesses and I have also been 
relieved of some responsibilities.
Later on, I lost my 65-year-old mother who was 
a pensioner. I thought after receiving pension 
Old Age pension  
benef iciary 
Invalidity pension 
beneficiary
Survivors Lump Sum 
beneficiary
forms and printed my payslips for me. I returned 
the updated form and payslips to the SSNIT 
Obuasi office so they could correct the anomaly in 
my financial records. 
I left work at age 54 and applied for my SSNIT Old 
Age Pension a year later. I have been receiving my 
pension promptly every month since August 2016.
The salary I was earning then has now been 
replaced by my monthly pension. I am a very 
satisfied pensioner, just like my father, who retired 
and received his monthly pension until he died at 
85 years. 
SSNIT is reliable and they pay on time. They are 
doing an excellent job and I have no problem at all. 
I urge all workers to be part of the SSNIT Scheme 
so you can have peace of mind when you retire.
I was made to meet the Medical Board to assess 
my condition. I was asked by the doctors to go 
for further medical examination and meet them 
again. This got me upset because I thought I had 
already presented enough evidence from my 
employer and doctor. 
I must confess, after this stage, the process 
continued swiftly and smoothly, and by the end 
of that same month, my pension was lodged 
into my bank account. Since then, I have been 
receiving my pension regularly on the third 
Thursday of every month to take care of myself. 
Though, I am no longer in active service, I can 
say I am very happy and relaxed. 
I want everyone to know that irrespective of the 
business you are engaged in, you can join the 
SSNIT Scheme and protect your future. More 
importantly, SSNIT provides support when a 
contributor can no longer work as a result of 
disability. 
for five years, there wouldn't be any money 
to claim but what SSNIT paid me as the only 
surviving child was overwhelming. What I can 
say to SSNIT is that, they have done so well 
and  I am grateful to them. They have helped in 
solving most of my challenges.  
Many of us think SSNIT just collects our monies 
(contributions) and at the end of the day we do 
not get any benefits.  Not only have I benefitted 
from SSNIT but I was also very impressed 
with the speed with which my applicaiton was 
processed. Within two weeks, I was able to 
receive my lump sum. The staff were very nice 
to me and I want to advise that anybody who 
has not joined SSNIT yet should do so. SSNIT 
will always be there for you.
Testimo
nials
 
 Visit  www.ssnit.org.gh
  Click SELF SERVICE to access the SSNIT Self Service Portal
Follow these simple steps to join the SSNIT Scheme:
Once you register with SSNIT, give your 
Ghana Card number to your employer. 
Ensure your employer pays your SSNIT 
contributions from the first month you 
start working. Even if you are a contract 
staff, casual worker or on probation, 
your employer has to pay your SSNIT 
contributions. It does not matter 
how much you earn or how long your 
employment lasts.
Your employer will deduct 5.5% from 
your monthly salary and then add 13% 
(calculated on workers’ basic salary but 
not deducted from it) making a total of 
18.5%. 
Your employer will pay 13.5% to SSNIT and 
5% to a second tier Corporate Trustee  
every month on your behalf. 
If you are a self-employed Member of the 
Scheme, you must contribute 13.5 % of 
your declared monthly income to SSNIT.
Out of the 13.5%, 11% is retained by SSNIT. 
2.5% is transferred to the National Health 
Insurance Authority (NHIA). If you are an 
active contributor, you are covered under 
the National Health Insurance Scheme 
and are exempted from payment of yearly 
premiums. 
If you have multiple employers, each 
employer has to pay SSNIT contributions 
on your behalf. Provide each employer 
with your Ghana Card number and insist 
How you can join the SSNIT Scheme
 Visit a SSNIT branch near you with 
your Ghana Card number and go 
through the registration process.
  If you already have a SSNIT number, 
you need to merge your SSNIT and 
Ghana Card numbers 
 Inform your employer once you have 
registered with SSNIT
What you should know as a contributor
1
2
3
4
6
5
7
8
9
10
11
How to check your SSNIT Statement online
contributions are paid for you even if 
your employment is part-time, casual or 
on contract basis. 
Contributions from multiple employers 
will help give you a higher monthly 
pension when you retire.
SSNIT pensions are a reflection of 
your basic  salary. SSNIT pension is 
calculated using your basic salary on 
which contributions are paid. If your 
basic salary  is high, you will receive a 
relatively high pension.  
Speak to your employer about making 
social security payments based on a 
consolidated salary (if possible).
Ensure your employer pays your monthly 
contributions regularly and on the 
correct basic salary by checking your  
SSNIT statement periodically.
Update your personal records (name 
change, address and beneficiary
nomination) with SSNIT. However, you 
CANNOT change the DATE OF BIRTH 
that you have given to SSNIT.
Report issues concerning your SSNIT 
contributions via       0302 611 622,      
     contactcentre@ssnit.org.gh,
Kofi Edem works with HEKO Company Limited. His monthly basic salary is  
GH¢ 1,500.00. Below is how social security contribution is deducted and paid on his behalf.  
First tier contribution
(13.5% of employee's basic salary paid to SSNIT)
GHS 202.50
Second tier contribution 
(5% of employee's basic salary paid to a Corporate Trustee) 
GHS 75.00
How social security contribution is 
calculated monthly for each employee
It is the duty of your employer to pay your SSNIT contributions. When you discover 
that your employer has not paid your SSNIT contributions, you have a duty to report it 
to SSNIT. Do not sit unconcerned. Remember, it is your future.
To report your employer, send an email to contactcentre@ssnit.org.gh or 
WhatsApp/SMS to 050 000 3050 and provide the following details:
Social Security and National 
Insurance Trust (SSNIT) or the Trust 
is the administrator of Ghana’s Basic 
National Social Security scheme 
known as the First Tier Pension 
Scheme. The SSNIT Scheme provides 
income security for all workers in 
Ghana including the self-employed. 
Just as insurance companies provide 
insurance cover for contingencies 
such as accidents, burglary and fire,  
the SSNIT Scheme provides cover 
for loss of income due to old age, 
invalidity and death. 
Tell SSNIT if your employer is not paying 
your contributions
 Your full name
 Ghana Card number
 Payslips for the exact months (if any)     
 The full name of the company or owner
 Address of the employer
 (location, nearest landmark or digital address)
 Phone number of the company or owner 
You can also report to the SSNIT Contact Centre on  
0302 611 622 or through any of our Social Media  
platforms @ssnitghana.
Be assured that SSNIT will not disclose your identity if you 
report your employer for failing to pay your social security 
contributions.
Help SSNIT to protect you from being cheated out of your 
pension.
 To Sign Up (First timer)
   Go to "Request for Portal ID"
   Select   Member 
   Click on “Sign up” to access the 
Portal Request Form
   Complete the form
  Refresh the page for new set of 
questions (three attempts)
   Click ‘Sign Up’ after answering the 
questions correctly
   A temporary password will be sent to 
the email address you provided
 
  You will be required to change the 
temporary password to your  
preferred password after logging in 
for the first time
  Once you access your personal 
lobby, select “Contribution” from 
the listed items on the menu to 
access your Statement of Account
Scan to view your Statement 
on the SSNIT website
Register with SSNIT 
using your Ghana Card
Kofi Edem's monthly social security contribution  of GHS 277.50 which is 18.5%  of 
his basic salary is remitted to the  first tier (SSNIT) and a second tier Corporate 
Trustee as follows:
SSNIT Pension gives superior 
value compared to Member 
contributions invested at 
91-Day Treasury Bill 
A random sample of 7600 Members who retired under 
PNDCL 247 was selected from the pensioner database and 
used to obtain this result. This result presents the average 
of the values obtained from the 7600 pensioners, for each 
period of pension payment.
Number of years 
pension paid
Number of times pension paid 
exceeds invested contributions 
at 91-day T-Bill rate
The discounted value of monthly pension 
paid to a Member for 12 years of retirement 
far exceeds  the value of the Member's 
contribution from registration to retirement, 
invested monthly at Treasury Bill Rate 
compounded quarterly.
12 yearsAlmost twice
15 years2.5  times
20 years5 times
25 yearsAbout 17 times
29 yearsAbout 46 times
Old Age Pension
1
Log in at the Self Service Portal 
with your Portal ID (SSNIT 
Number and the temporary 
password sent to your email)
2
Kofi Edem's  
first tier contribution
Amount remitted 
to NHIA 
Amount retained 
by SSNIT
2.5%
13.5%
GHS 37.50
GHS 165.00
GHS 202.50
11%
Employee's Name:
Kofi Edem
Employee's Basic Salary:
GHS 1,500.00
What is SSNIT?
Who can be a Member?
All workers can join and insure their earned incomes with SSNIT.  
Workers who registered, contributed and stopped at a point in time can 
rejoin and contribute till age 60. 
  
NB: New joiners must be between 15 and 45 years
• The SSNIT Scheme pays you Old 
Age Pension until death.
• Pensions are increased annually 
to help maintain the purchasing 
power of Pensioners.
• SSNIT provides you superior value 
compared to Member contributions 
invested in secure long-term 
investments such as treasury bills.
• The SSNIT Scheme provides life 
insurance to Members through 
the payment of Survivors Benefit 
to their dependants.
•  The SSNIT Scheme is a defined 
benefit scheme where benefits 
paid are predetermined by law. 
Why join SSNIT?
Stop for a moment and think about these
      Time flies and old age is inevitable
      Accidents and illnesses may occur while you are working
      There are occurrences like death which you have no control over
SSNIT has got you covered in all these circumstances.
                      
Prince
Adelaide
Francis 
It's simple and convenient
Pay your SSNIT contributions using:
 it's easy! • it's
Mobile Money  
USSD short code   
*711*9#  
Web Portal  
portal.ssnit.org.gh 
 
1
Terms and conditions apply
Debit Card 
Web Portal -portal.ssnit.org.gh
2
      
      @ssnitghana   



any SSNIT branch  
Terms and conditions apply

Submit the documents listed below to a SSNIT branch near 
you and you will be assisted through the registration process.
Newly registered business?  
Join and contribute to the SSNIT Scheme
Obligations of employers towards employees
Now that you have registered your business with SSNIT, you need to secure the 
future of your employees as well. That can only happen when you pay their monthly 
social security contributions. 
Here is how:
  Register all your employees (both Ghanaians and non-Ghanaians) with SSNIT. If 
a new worker, who is not already a Member of the Scheme joins your company, 
ensure that you register him or her within one month of employment.
As an employer, there are periods where for one 
reason or the other you may delay in complying 
with the law to pay the monthly SSNIT contributions 
of your employees.
When you default, SSNIT shall serve you with a 
demand notice. There is a 30-day grace period 
within which you can pay up or negotiate mutually 
beneficial terms of settlement with SSNIT. 
However, if all negotiations fail, SSNIT will take legal 
action against you. This is because the law places 
an obligation on SSNIT to pay benefits to Members 
and/or their nominated dependants.
Superannuation (Old Age) Pension
This benefit is paid to replace part of your lost income when you retire 
from active service. It is either paid as Full Pension or Reduced Pension. 
Survivors Lump Sum Benef it
Invalidity Pension 
This benefit is paid to replace part of your lost income once you have been certified by a Medical Board as being 
incapable of working due to permanent mental or physical disability.
All eligible pensioners are paid till death.  
 
SSNIT assumes longevity risk with this benefit.
*
Scan to use the 
Pension Calculator
Scan to watch the tutorial on   
"How to calculate pension"
Benef its under the SSNIT Scheme
Full Pension
This is paid to a Member of the 
Scheme who retires at age 60 and has 
contributed not less than 180 months 
under Act 766 or 240 months under 
PNDC Law 247 in aggregate.
Reduced Pension
This is paid to a Member who retires 
voluntarily on attaining age 55 or 
more, but below age 60 and has 
contributed not less than 180 months 
under Act 766 or 240 months under 
PNDC Law 247 in aggregate.
Qualifying conditions 
  You should have contributed 
180 months to earn a minimum 
pension right* of 37.5% and 
420 months to earn a maximum 
pension right of 60%.
 
 You should have attained a 
minimum age of 55 for reduced 
pension or 60 for full pension
How to apply for Old Age Pension
Visit a SSNIT branch near you with:
 Your Ghana Card Number
 A retirement/exit letter from your 
employer (if any).
 Bank account details
You will be given an application form to 
complete and submit to begin the process.
 Bank account details
 Evidence of birth (birth certificate /  
   weighing card/ baptismal card) of minors  
   (if applicable)  
 School attestation (if applicable)
How can a dependant apply for Survivors 
Lump Sum?
Family members (spouse, adult children or 
extended family) of a deceased Member 
must report the death of the Member to 
the nearest SSNIT branch with any of the 
following as evidence of death:
  Death Certificate
  Medical Certificate of cause of death
 Letter from employer of the deceased 
Member (if the person died in service)
 Letters of Administration
 Letter from a religious leader
  Affidavit from Chief of village or town  
where the deceased resided
 Police / Coroner's report
Note: Applicants may add an obituary, a 
funeral programme, a mortuary report, 
or burial permit to any one of the listed 
documents.
After confirmation of death, the nominated 
dependants are contacted to present their 
photo ID cards for identification. 
SSNIT will confirm the validity of nominated 
dependants and request them to collect, 
complete and submit application forms.
They will also be required to present the 
following documents for the payment 
process to begin. 
Qualifying conditions 
  You must have contributed for a 
minimum of 12 months within the last 
36 months prior to the occurrence of 
the disability.
  You must have been declared 
permanently invalid and incapable 
of normal gainful employment by a 
recognised Medical Officer and certified 
by a Medical Board.
How to apply for Invalidity Pension 
  Go to a SSNIT branch near you in person 
or send a representative.
 
 Submit the following:
 
  A medical report from a recognised 
Medical  Officer certifying that you have 
become an invalid.
 Letter from your employer if you were in  
active service before your being 
declared incapable of working.
  Bank account details.
Collect, complete and submit a Pension 
Application Form. 
You  will be required to appear before a 
Medical Board for examination.
After all conditions have been 
met, SSNIT will advise you on your 
entitlement.  
For how long will payments be made?
You will receive your monthly payments 
till death. However, pension payments 
cease when/if you recover. 
 
After recovery, pensions paid are 
written-off. All existing contributions 
remain valid and you can continue 
contributing to the Scheme and be 
eligible for any of the benefits (in full).
This benefit is paid as lump sum to 
the nominated dependant(s) of a 
Member upon his/her death while in 
service or on retirement. A Pensioner 
who dies before he/she attains age 
75 under Act 766 or age 72 under 
PNDC Law 247, will have his/her 
nominated dependant(s) paid a 
Survivors Lump Sum benefit.
Qualifying conditions
  Member should have 
contributed a minimum of  
12 months prior to the death.
  Dependant(s) should have 
been nominated by a deceased 
Member.
  Dependant(s) should have been 
included in the list of nominees 
through the law courts
The self-employed
Are you self-employed?  
You can also join the SSNIT Scheme. 
Visit a SSNIT branch near you with your 
Ghana Card number and you will be 
assisted through the registration process.
Indicate your economic activity and 
declare your annual/monthly income at 
the point of registration.
Pay 13.5% of your declared monthly 
income and enjoy all the benefits the 
Scheme provides.
1
2 
3
Visit www.ssnit.org.gh to use the Pension Calculator 
to estimate your pension. You can also visit a SSNIT 
branch for it to be done for you.
Factors to consider when calculating your pension
1 Your age
2 Average of three  best years’ annual salaries
3 Number of months you have contributed
Visit the SSNIT channel on YouTube to watch the 
tutorial on  "How to calculate pension"
Contact Centre: 0302 611 622 
Toll-Free: 0800 110 094 (Vodafone only)  
Whatsapp and SMS (DG’s Off ice Direct): 0500 003 050 
Email: contactcentre@ssnit.org.gh
Website: www.ssnit.org.gh      @ssnitghana  
Digital Address (Pension House): GA-107-4293 
 
Certificate of Incorporation
 
Company Code/ Regulation
 
Details of your worker(s) 
Name, Ghana Card Number,  
Salary, Date Employed
 Pay contributions every month on behalf of the workers to SSNIT. Do this 
by deducting 5.5% of the worker's basic salary every month and add 13% 
(calculated on workers’ basic salary but not deducted from it) to make 18.5%, 
which is the total social security contributions to be paid on behalf of the 
worker.
 Out of the total social security contributions (18.5%), remit 13.5% to SSNIT 
(administrators of the first tier scheme) within 14 days of the ensuing month. 
The remaining 5% is to be paid to a second tier Corporate Trustee of your 
choice.
 Each contribution payment should be accompanied with a Contribution Report 
which is a list of all workers with their Ghana Card numbers  
and the salary each worker earned during the month.
 Submit your Contribution Report at the end of the month 
whether contributions are remitted to SSNIT or not.
 If you (the employer) fail to comply with contribution 
payments after receiving a written demand 
notice, a penalty of 3% shall be imposed on 
the outstanding amount.
This benefit is a lump sum payment made to a 
non-Ghanaian Member of the SSNIT Scheme, 
who satisfies the Trust that he/she is emigrating 
or has emigrated permanently from Ghana.
Qualifying conditions 
 You must have registered on to the Scheme 
as a non-Ghanaian
Note: Members who do not have their embassies 
in Ghana need local notarisation. If the Member 
is outside Ghana, notarisation must be done in 
his/her home country.
4
Letter from your employer indicating that you 
are emigrating or have emigrated from Ghana 
permanently
Copy of the biodata page of your passport  
Copies of your work and residence permits
Confirmation from the embassy or High 
Commission and evidence of transportation 
(notarise if travelling by road)
The SSNIT branch will provide you with an 
Emigration Lump Sum Benefit Application 
Form to be completed and submitted.
SSNIT will process the application as a  
one-time lump sum payment. 
How to apply for Emigration Lump Sum Benefit
Visit any SSNIT branch with these documents:
NB: Old Age Lump Sum
A Member who is at least 55 
years and has contributed less 
than the minimum number of 
months required for Full Pension 
or Reduced Pension is paid Old 
Age Lump Sum Benefit. 
Calculate your Old Age Pension
Pension indexation
SSNIT Pensions are increased annually   
through indexation to help maintain 
the purchasing power of Pensioners. 
Indexation tries to cushion Pensioners, 
especially those on low pensions, in 
conformity with the solidarity principle 
of social security.
Payment of the benefit will be made into the 
individual bank accounts of the beneficiaries.
OR
Member
Dependants
Terms and conditions apply
Emigration Lump Sum Benef it
Pension Right is the portion of lost income the Scheme replaces 
based on the number of months a Member contributes to the 
Scheme. This is expressed as a percentage or proportion.
Unlike other insurance schemes, the SSNIT 
Scheme ignores all pre-existing medical 
conditions prior to enrolment and provides  
a life policy by paying the survivors of  
Members who pass on. 
 
SSNIT assumes mortality risk with this  
benefit.
SSNIT provides in-service 
protection against disability with 
this benefit.
Remember to 
pay your workers' 
contributions by the 
14
th
 of every month
Congratulations on the establishment of your company/business. As a new business, it is mandatory 
for you to register your organisation with SSNIT within 30 days after commencement of operations.  
image: Freepik.com
BACK PAGE
FRONT PAGE