86 
© 2019 by the authors; licensee Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
 
Asian Journal of Education and Training 
Vol. 5, No. 1, 86-92, 2019 
ISSN(E) 2519-5387 
DOI: 10.20448/journal.522.2019.51.86.92 
© 2019 by the authors; licensee Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
   
 
 
 
Teacher Retention: A Review of Policies for Motivating Rural Basic School 
Teachers in Ghana 
 
Phinihas Acheampong
1

    
 
Juliana Fosua Gyasi
2 
 
 
( Corresponding Author) 
 
1,2
PhD student, Faculty of Education, School of Educational Technology, Beijing Normal University, China 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The study primarily explored the challenges of teaching in rural basic schools in Ghana. 
Qualitative research method through semi-structured interviews and document analyses were 
used as data collection instruments. The participants for the study included six educational field 
workers which constituted a district education officer (Circuit Supervisor), two head teachers and 
three classroom teachers. Priority of the findings was highlighted on the provision of 
accommodation with adequate installation of lighting facility, potable drinking water, and 
transport facilities such as a vehicle, motorbike and bicycle to ease the living constraints of 
teachers who serve in underprivileged learning communities. Again, professional development 
programs were found relevant to encourage and promote teachers working in remote areas. 
Results of the study shown that rural basic school teachers do not see why they should receive 
equivalent conditions of service as their peers who teach in urban schools. It is therefore 
recommended that, about one-third of teachers‟ salary should be apportioned as additional 
incentive to motivate teachers who serve in rural basic schools. Again, special student-trainees 
recruitment strategies should be adopted to recruit potential teachers from underprivileged 
communities to receive training and serve their people. This can effectively be implemented when 
the District Sponsorship Scheme Project is restored to enhance better deployment of teachers in 
underserved schools. 
 
Keywords: Teacher retention, Motivation, Supervision, Rural teachers. 
JEL Classification: Education and Research Institutions (Government Policy128) 
 
Citation | Phinihas  Acheampong;  Juliana  Fosua  Gyasi (2019). 
Teacher Retention: A Review of Policies for Motivating Rural Basic 
School   Teachers   in   Ghana. Asian   Journal   of   Education   and 
Training, 5(1): 86-92. 
History:  
Received: 22 October 2018 
Revised: 26 November 2018 
Accepted: 2 January 2019 
Published: 21 January 2019 
Licensed: This   work   is licensed   under   a Creative   Commons 
Attribution 3.0 License  
Publisher:  Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
 
Contribution/Acknowledgement: Both authors    contributed    to    the 
conception and design of the study. 
Funding: This study received no specific financial support. 
Competing  Interests: The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  conflict  of 
interests. 
Transparency: The   authors   confirm   that   the   manuscript   is   an   honest, 
accurate,  and  transparent  account  of  the  study  was  reported;  that  no  vital 
features  of  the  study  have  been  omitted;  and  that  any  discrepancies  from  the 
study as planned have been explained. 
Ethical: This study follows all ethical practices during writing.   
 
 
Contents 
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 87 
2. Teacher Retention and Attrition .................................................................................................................................................. 87 
3. Methods ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 88 
4. Discussion and Findings ................................................................................................................................................................. 89 
4. Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 91 
References .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 92 
 
 
 
 
 

Asian Journal of Education and Training, 2019, 5(1): 86-92 
87 
© 2019 by the authors; licensee Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Teacher  attrition  in  basic  schools  is a  global  phenomenon  which  affects the  quality  of  education  in  Africa. 
Stakeholders  of  education  have  expressed  concerns  on  the  rapid  rate  at  which  some  teachers  vacate  from  the 
profession  and  the  consistent  absenteeism  in  rural  schools.  There  have  been  instances  where  teacher  retention 
policies  were  quite  substantive  in  sustaining  and  improving  the  teaching  workforce.  It  seems  that  such  policies 
have  not  fully  been  implemented  to  overcome  the  canker.  Though  the  problem  is  found  country  wide,  the  most 
alarming cases are seemingly prevalent in the rural areas. The impression is that about 66% of rural dwellers are 
partially  deprived  from  having  quality  education (World  Bank,  2014) a  situation  that  is  fervently  criticized  by 
International  organizations‟  such  as  World  Bank, UNDP (United  Nations Development  Program), UNESCO 
(United   Nations   Education   for   Scientific   and   Cultural   Organization)   and   FAO   (Food   and   Agricultural 
Organization). 
The National  Education  For  All  (EFA)  Review  Report  in  (2014),  cites  insufficient  financial  and  material 
resources,  poor  road  networks  linking  deprived  areas,  inadequate  trained  teachers  especially  in  remote  and 
underserved  villages,  poor  credibility  of  reliable  data  in  schools,  frequent  intruders  of  outsiders  in  educational 
issues,  inadequate  school  infrastructure  and  facilities,  and  indifference  in  political  will  power  as  the  major 
challenging  factors  of  teacher  retention  in  Ghana (UNESCO,  2014).  With  respect  for  attaining  the  EFA  and 
Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs)  in  Ghana, teacher  education  programs  were  intensified  to  nurture 
qualified  teachers  and  maintained  a  well-balanced  distribution  of  teachers  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  Again, 
programs such as school feeding, capitation grant (Ministry of Education, 2013; Adam et al., 2016) distribution of 
free uniforms and exercise books were implemented to enforce the achievement of Strategic Development Plan in 
2015. 
It must be emphasized that, remarkable improvement has been seen in basic school enrolment, which could be 
attributed  to  the  implementation  of  the  said  policies.  In  the (Education  Sector  Performance  Report,  2015) the 
statistical analysis of the Net Enrolment Rate (NER) of the three levels of Ghanaian basic school indicates 82.7% in 
Kindergarten, 91% in primary and 49% in Junior High School. Comparatively, there has been 27% increase NER in 
KG from 2010/2015, 7.4% in primary education and a steady growth of 1.5% in JHS (ESPR, 2015).  
In  order  to  secure  enrolment  with  meaningful  learning,  the  quality  of  the  teaching  workforce  should 
correspond with the enrolment outcome. However, in Ghana, the plight of curriculum implementers who teach in 
disadvantaged areas are not taken into proper consideration. As a result, such schools are more likely to suffer the 
consequences of teacher instability, which affects the academic performance of most pupils. Moreover, the very few 
teachers  who  accept  postings  in  such  dilapidated  areas  do  not  utilize  the  full  instructional  hours  creating  vacant 
classes  and  underutilized  contact  hours.  Although  there  is  an  outstanding  teacher  retention  challenges  in  basic 
schools in the whole country, this research seeks to focus on teacher retention problems in rural areas. 
The  study  is  meaningful  in  promoting  teacher  retention  in  Ghana.  It  seeks  to  bring  to  light  the  devastating 
effect  of  teacher  attrition  rate  in  rural  communities. In  addition  to  this,  the  study  endeavors  to  revive  existing 
policies,  which  will  motivate  teacher  sustainability.  Through  the  findings  of  the  study,  the  community  and  other 
teacher associations such as GNAT (Ghana National Association of Teachers), NAGRAT (National Association of 
Graduate Teachers), Non-Governmental Organizations (UNESCO, 2015) Parent Teacher Associations (PTA) and 
other  private  business  cohorts  will  see  the  need  to  support  the  government  in  managing  education.  It  must  be 
noted that all these can be achieved effectively when educational providers and beneficiaries of education recognize 
the usefulness of knowledge as the bedrock for developing every country.   
 
2. Teacher Retention and Attrition  
Retention has extensively been used in different ways by a diverse school of thought.   From the Dictionary of 
Merriam-Webster, it is described “as the act or ability to keep or retain something or someone”. In the context of 
teacher  education,  it  refers  to  the  ability  of  an  educational  institution  to  sustain  the  teaching  workforce  from  the 
point of recruitment until retirement. These mean educational institutions are not only responsible for recruiting, 
training and deploying but ensuring the stability of the teaching workforce. For the purpose of the study, teacher 
stability  refers  to  avoidance  of  rampant  job  vacation  and  unnecessary  transfer  of  teachers  from  rural  to  urban 
schools or from teaching field to another employment. A review on teacher attrition by International Task Force 
on Teachers for EFA (2010) defines attrition as “all permanent losses of teachers from the teaching profession, for 
whatever reason”. The paper highlighted voluntary resignation and retirement as the two major driving forces for 
teacher attrition in many countries, which was described as unpredictable and predicable departure.  
The  impact  of  teacher  attrition  is  prevalent  on  high  cost  of  recruiting,  training,  hiring  and  professional 
development,  which  adversely  affect  the  financial  stability  of  the  country.  In  a  broader  example,  developed 
countries,  such  as  The  United  States,  spends  billions  of  dollars  only  to  fight  the  menace  of  teacher  attrition.  For 
instance, The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) reported that an amount of three 
billion dollars was estimated to have been spent on teacher attrition in the United States (as cited in Karsenti and 
Collin (2013)). In a similar scenario, the Ministry of Education Science and Sports (2008) disclosed that an amount 
of $100,000,000 was budgeted to cater for the cost of teacher absenteeism problems alone in Ghana.  
 
2.1. Challenges of Teaching in Rural Schools 
According  to FAO et  al. (2003) rural  areas  are  defined  by  certain  specific  features. The  document  emphasizes 
that  rural  areas  have  low  human  settlement,  which  has  a  population  of  about  5-10,000  people  with  the  main 
occupation  being  agriculture.  Moreover,  rural  areas  are  detached  from  urban  areas  with  long  distances  and  most 
errands are  embarked  with high  transactional cost. These features of  rural  areas do not differ from  rural  areas in 
Ghana,  but  most  typical  rural  areas  are  scattered  villages  separated  from  one  another.  Ghana  has  about  26.76 
million populations in which 66% are dwellers of remote areas. Schools in such areas are built within the center of 
the  scattered  villages  to  allow  equal  accessibility.  Pupils  cover  distances  more  than  45minutes  by  foot  to  enable 
them reach some schools to acquire knowledge. The problem is that it is sometimes difficult to reach school going 
children living in remote areas for educational purposes (WB, 2008).  

Asian Journal of Education and Training, 2019, 5(1): 86-92 
88 
© 2019 by the authors; licensee Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
 
 
Basic  necessities  of  life  such  as  water,  food  and  shelter  are  difficult  to  attain in  remote  dwelling  schools. 
Occupants of rural areas build their houses most often with the aim of providing shelter for their families. Migrant 
workers like teachers and nurses find accommodation challenging in such places. Few workers are known to reside 
in  government  or  state  houses  such  as  the  Social  Security  and  National  Insurance  Trust  (SSNIT)  apartment  in 
urban areas. However, in the rural areas, government has made little effort to provide accommodation for workers 
especially teachers. This makes teachers find it difficult to get standard lodging apartment. The very few available 
houses for rent are mostly unconducive for teachers‟ habitation, coupled with  lacking facilities such  as electricity.  
In addition to this phenomenon, road networks to most rural areas are very deplorable making teachers who want 
to attend school  from distant towns impossible (ESPR, 2015). World Bank report in 2008 confirms that issues of 
this nature have proven government effort futile in deploying and sustaining teachers in remote areas.  
It  is  clear  that  such  poor  working  environment in  rural  areas  creates  huge  setbacks  for  teacher  retention. 
Novice teachers who accept postings in rural areas find their way out within a couple of one or two years. Taylor 
and Mulhall (2001) contend that remote areas create limited prospects for job development. Teachers become more 
isolated and are detached from workshops and trainings that improve their professional development. In order to 
improve the quality of  education, there is the need for adequate teacher preparation  program, which should  focus 
on  both  teaching  pedagogy  and  content (Mulkeen et  al.,  2007).  The  paper  further  asserts that  workshops  and 
orientation  programs  such  as  in-service  program  enable  upgrading  of  untrained teacher‟s qualifications, provides 
short-term courses on contents and, teaching skills and provide masters‟ degree courses for qualified teachers. 
However, the significance of in-service programs to motivate teachers to remain in the teaching profession should 
also consider  the  trade-offs  and  implications  of  teacher  supply  and  finances (UNESCO  &  IICBA,  2016).  For 
example,   in-service   program   opportunities   for   teachers   resonate   with   promotions   (salary   adjustment)   and 
migration of teaching positions.  
Further,  research  in  this  field  has  shown  that,  a  greater  percentage  of  teachers  has  shown  preference  for 
teaching in urban schools which are more effective in teaching and learning practices than in rural schools. This is 
due  to  the  fact  that  life  and  job  satisfaction  in  urban  schools  are  far  better  than  rural  areas (Akyeampong  and 
Lewin, 2002). Loeb et al. (2012) revealed four key findings of the relationship between school effectiveness through 
recruitment, assignment, development and retention of teachers. The paper contends that schools that are effective 
attract  and  hire  quality teachers,  receive  equitable  distribution  of  teachers,  improve  job  professional  development 
(Hedges, 2000) and retain quality teachers. Based on the assertions of Loeb et al. (2012) it is clear that rural schools 
in  Ghana  do  not  have  certain  characteristics  which  attract  potential  teachers.  However,  teachers  in  rural  schools 
become less and less effective due to the absence of in-service training and subsequent workshops, which enhance 
professional development.  
 
3. Methods 
The  study  employed  semi-structured  interview  as  a  qualitative  research  designed  for data  collection.  The 
researcher  prepared  an  interview  guide,  which  served  as  an  outline  or  framework  for  adequate  questioning  and 
response.  The  interview  process  was  made  flexible  to  solicit  in-depth  response  from  the  participants (Bryman, 
2008). Though  the  researcher  adopted  semi-structured  interview,  questions  were  not  strictly  followed as 
structured in the outline. Bryman recommends that, researchers who pick on responses of their interviewee receive 
detailed  description  of  both  anticipated  and  unanticipated  responses.  This  paved  way  for  thorough  retrieval  of 
information, which was relevant for the study as participants unfolds their story.  
Because  the  concept  of  teacher  retention  is  an  absolute  phenomenological  study,  the  researcher  guided 
participants to describe in rich detail the context of the challenges rural teachers encounters in remote areas. This 
revealed the  particularity  and  complexity  of  human  experiences  in  the  context  of  teacher  retention  in  Ghana 
(LeCompte and Preissle, 1993).  
According to some renowned scholars in the field of qualitative research, purposefully selecting participant for 
data  collection  is  regarded  as  the  best  sampling  approach (LeCompte  and  Preissle,  1993; Patton,  2002). Patton 
(2015) also suggests that purposeful sampling provide the means of “selecting information-rich  cases  to  study, 
cases  that  by  their  nature  and  substance  will  illuminate  the  inquiry  question  being  investigated” (pp. 264). This 
sampling  approach  was  adopted  by  the  researcher  to  gain  detailed  insights  and  understanding  of  selected 
participants in the study.  
Having this in mind, the researcher selected 6 participants from one (1) deprived district out of the seventy-five 
(75)  underprivileged  districts  in  Ghana.  The  participants  for  the  study  consisted  of  males  and  females  who  were 
field  practitioners  as  teachers  and  educational  administrators.  They  included  two  rural  basic  head  teachers  from 
different schools, one district education officer (Circuit Supervisor) and three classroom teachers who have served 
for more than three years in rural basic school. This was done to gain the general perception and experience of the 
challenges  of  teaching  in  remote  schools and the possible strategies that can enhance teachers‟ sustainability in 
such places. In all, participants were interviewed through face-to-face interaction. Each interview session lasted for 
at  least  45  minutes.  To  enhance  confidentiality  and  anonymity,  names  of  participant  were  pseudonym  with 
alphabets starting from „A‟ to „F‟.  
Again,  a  review  of  the  document  was  done  to  serve  as  secondary  source  of  data,  which  enhanced  analysis  of 
policies  under  the  Ministry  of  Education  in  teacher  recruitment,  training,  deployment  and  retention.  This 
document  includes  national  and  international  publications  (UNESCO,  GES,  OECD,  MOE  etc.)  reports  on 
education projects and teacher development. 
For the purpose of data analysis, the researcher gathered responses from participant through field notes, tape 
recordings  and  jottings.  A  complete  reading  and  listening  of  the  text  and  audio  was  done  which  enhanced  easy 
coding  of  the  text.  The  data  was  categorized  through  mind-maps  by  which  respective  themes  were  derived  for 
further interpretation (Hycner, 1985). Participants were given the scripts to read through after the coding to verify 
if they had not been misinterpreted. This was done to ensure that responses provided by the participant were valid 
and the data gathered were reliable respectively (Patton, 2015). 
 

Asian Journal of Education and Training, 2019, 5(1): 86-92 
89 
© 2019 by the authors; licensee Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
 
 
4. Discussion and Findings  
Three  main  themes  were  developed  from  the  interview  and  document  analysis  conducted  during  the  study. 
These  themes  are:  categories  of  basic school  teachers  in  Ghana,  challenges  of  rural  teachers  and  strategies  for 
mitigating teacher attrition in rural basic schools. 
 
4.1. Category of Basic School Teachers  
According  to the document analysis, Ghana has undertaken  several  teacher education  reforms to improve the 
quality of education in the country. The category of teaching force which has been built over the years include 4-
year Certificate „A‟ Teacher, Certificate „B‟ Teacher, 2-Year  Post-Secondary Certificate „A‟ Teacher, 3-Year  Post 
Secondary Certificate „A‟ Teacher, 2-Year  Specialist/3-Year  Diploma  Teacher,  The  Graduate  teacher,  National 
Service Personnel and the Pupil Teacher (Agbeko, 2007).  
It  must  be  clarified  that  in  Ghana,  there  are  two  main  categories  of  basic  school  teachers  which  form  the 
workforce for the education  service. The trained teachers have received formal training  in  Colleges of  Education, 
Distance  or  Sandwich  programs  while  the  untrained  teachers  normally  referred  as  pupil  teachers  are  those  who 
have been  recruited  from high  school, polytechnics and  universities to teach but do not  have any  formal  teaching 
training. Again, trained teachers employed by government of Ghana are permanent professional teachers while the 
untrained  teachers  are  recruited  as  temporal  workers  whose  contract  are  renewable  annually  based  on  job 
satisfaction, efficiency and existing vacancies in the service. Participant „A‟ confirmed that; 
My  school  has  14  teaching  staff  with  7  trained  teachers  while  the  rest  are  untrained.  The  untrained  teachers  were 
recruited  with  high  school  certificate  while  the  trained  teachers  were  posted  to  the  school  directly  after  completing 
teacher training college.  
In Ghana, the current recommended minimum qualification for teaching in basic school is diploma certificate. 
This is as a result of the upgraded teacher training colleges into diploma awarding institutions since 2000. This has 
immensely attracted and increased the teacher supply in the country. Again, further policies were implemented to 
enable Cert „A‟ and untrained teachers to upgrade their qualification to diploma level. Programs such as Sandwich 
courses,  Untrained  Teachers  Diploma  in  Basic  Education  (UTDBE)  and  other  Distance  Educational  programs 
aimed  at  improving  teacher  reputation,  status  and  retention  especially  in  rural  areas (Asare-Danso,  2014). 
Participant „A‟ who heads one of the rural schools confirmed that;  
Pupil teachers in my staff are hastily pursuing further studies to upgrade their professional status to at least diploma 
level. This was as a result of the government intervention to withdraw untrained teachers who had not been formally 
nurtured on teaching pedagogy. I must confess it is a good initiative to improve the quality of education. The problem 
is that most pupil teachers who successfully complete their program are unwilling to work in the rural areas. The rural 
schools end up losing their few teachers to the semi and urban area schools. 
 
4.2. Indicators for Public Basic Schools in Ghana, by Levels 
The table below depicts teacher indicators in public basic schools, by levels. Results from the three levels show 
that,  percentage  of  trained  teachers  has  improved  significantly  over  time  from  32%  in  2009/10  to  61.7%  as 
stipulated  in  the ESPR  (2015).  In  the ESPR  (2013) 95%  of  teacher  retention  were  estimated  to  be  achieved 
nationwide. It can be inferred from the statistics that about one third of teacher‟s projection has not yet been 
accomplished. This might be due to factors such as the withdrawal of trainees‟ allowance, lack of incentivized 
schemes for rural teachers and poor remuneration. Again, statistics on teacher deployment in basic education sector 
indicated that Kindergarten schools suffer high attrition rate of trained teachers (47%) than primary (56%) and JHS 
(78%).   
 
Table-1. Teacher Indicators for Public Basic Schools in Ghana by Levels 
 National Deprived districts 
KG 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 
PTR 37 34 35 54 52 52 
PTTR 72 62 56 159 138 112 
%Trained Teachers 52 55 61.7 34 37 47 
Primary 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 
PTR 33 32 34 39 38 40 
PTTR 48 46 45 78 77 72 
% Trained Teachers 69 70 75 50 50 56 
JHS 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 
PTR 16 15 16 20 19 20 
PTTR 19 18 18 27 27 26 
% Trained Teachers 84 84 87.8 7 72 78 
       Source: Adapted from ESPR (2015). 
  
4.3. Challenges of Rural Teachers 
The  deplorable  nature  of  rural  environment  makes  rural  teaching  unsatisfactory.  The  interview  conducted 
revealed  accommodation,  electricity,  market,  health  care  facility,  network  (internet),  potable  drinking  water  and 
feeling of isolation as major factors of teacher attrition in rural areas. Participant „B‟ commented that,  
The major challenge of my school is accommodation. We have teachers’ quarters (bungalow) which has five single 
bedrooms that is supposed to house 14 teaching staff. Due to inadequacy of lodging places most of the teachers reside in 
towns which are more than 5km away from the school. 
Some of the rural  schools do not have accommodation  for teachers at all. This leads to excessive absenteeism 
and  loss  of  contact  hours,  which  eventually  affect  the  quality  of  education  in  the  country.  The  case  becomes 
exacerbated as a result of the deplorable nature of the road. Participant D confirmed, 

Asian Journal of Education and Training, 2019, 5(1): 86-92 
90 
© 2019 by the authors; licensee Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
 
 
Most  drivers  do  not  want  to  ply  their  vehicles  on  such  roads.  It  therefore  becomes  difficult  for  us  to  attend school 
regularly and punctually. The situation looks ‘okay’ for those who use motorbikes as a means for transportation to 
school. On the other hand, the cost is unbearable due to high cost of maintenance and exorbitant fuel prices.   
Comparatively, most health care facilities built in rural areas have quarters (bungalows) attached to the facility, 
which provides shelter for health practitioners. Why is the case different from teacher education? When will basic 
school  teachers  in  Ghana  be  considered  for  such  labor  incentives?  Until  now,  state  housing  project  for  public 
servants in the country has not been expanded to cover workers in urban areas not to talk of public rural servants. 
The very few housing projects initiated with the „tax payers‟ money have been abandoned uncompleted under the 
mercy of sun and rain (Example, the affordable housing project initiated under the auspices of Ex-President John 
Agyekum Kuffour in 2004).  
Some  rural  teachers  were  asked  if  their  financial  contribution  towards  Teachers  Fund  in  respective  teacher 
associations is sufficient for securing accommodation. Participant „F‟ responded that; 
The Ghana National Association of Teachers (GNAT) and Coalitions of Concern Teachers Association are the two 
main  teacher  associations  in  Ghana for  basic  education.  Efforts  have  been  made  by  GNAT  for  example  to  support 
teachers with housing facilities since the establishment of Teachers’ Fund in 1998. However, these proposals have not 
provided the teacher with viable financing options to enable them to participate.  
The  findings  of  the  study  are  consistent  with  EFA  report  which cited  insufficient  financial  and  material 
resources,  poor  road  networks  linking  deprived  areas,  inadequate  trained  teachers  especially  in  remote  and 
underserved villages, poor credibility of reliable data in schools, inadequate school infrastructure and facilities, and 
indifference in political will power as the major challenging factors of teacher retention in Ghana (UNESCO, 2014). 
 
4.4. Challenges of Rural Head Teachers 
Findings from the study indicated that rural basic school principals face uncountable obstacles in the process of 
discharging  their duties. Administratively, heads of  rural  basic schools complain bitterly  of  high  absenteeism  and 
lateness on the part of both students and teachers. According to the response of participant „F‟, rural teachers‟ use 
of flimsy excuses such as attending to hospital, withdrawing money from the bank, going for lectures, inability to 
get  transport  (car)  to  school  as  an  excuse  to  absent  themselves.  Education  Sector  Performance  Report  in  2013 
gives statistical overview of teacher attendances in 41 deprived districts. 
 
Table 2 Teacher attendances at the district level (41 deprived districts) 
 KG (%) Primary (%) JHS (%) 
Overall attendance rate 78 79 82 
Average district attendance rate 78 79 81 
Highest  district attendance rate 90 90 91 
Lowest district attendance rate 65 66 58 
       Source: ESPR (2013) 
 
The  figure  above illustrates  the  attendance  rate  of  41  deprived  districts  in  Ghana.  It  can  be  deduced  that  the 
average attendance rate of teachers increased in relation to increasing levels of education. Teachers‟ attendance rate 
in KG (78%), Primary (79%) and JHS (82%) has a rough average of 20% absenteeism over time. This confirms the 
response given by headmaster „B‟ which stipulates that: 
High absenteeism occurs in my school usually during the beginning and ending of the week, Mondays and Friday’s to 
be precise. At least in every week, three to four teachers of my staff absent themselves from school. Due to this rampant 
absenteeism, scheme of work is inefficiently completed. Perhaps, it affects the academic performance of the school.  
It is clear from this point that the lowest deprived district attendance rate of 58% in Junior High School (JHS) 
is  a  transparent  indication  of  high  absenteeism rate in  rural  basic  schools  in  Ghana  which  adversely  affect  the 
academic performance of students. What is unbeknown to educational stakeholders is that such negative behaviors 
have greater influence on the overall performance of Basic Education Certificate Examination (BECE). 
 
Table 3. BECE „above average‟ rates by deprived and non-deprived districts, 2014 
District Type Subjects 
 English (%) Mathematics (%) Science (%) Social Studies (%) 
Deprived districts 
8.3 13 10.3 9.4 
Non-deprived districts 
26.3 26.3 25.4 24.9 
National  
23 23 22 23 
   Source: ESPR (2015) 
 
Figure 1.2 indicates the „above average‟ rates of BECE statistics of deprived and non-deprived  districts  in 
Ghana.  From  the  analysis,  it  can  be  construed  that  non-deprived  districts  with  adequate  and  qualified  teachers 
perform better than deprived districts. This might be due to various factors such as high retention rate in the urban 
schools. Perhaps, the working environment is conducive with facilities such as stable electricity supply, availability 
of  Internet,  accommodation,  and  portable  drinking  water. Loeb et  al. (2012) confirms  that  schools  with  favorable 
working conditions are capable of attracting quality teachers. This affects the quality of education in non-deprived 
districts as exhibited on the table. 
 
3.5. Salary and other Incentives 
Several packages attract and retain teachers to teach in rural basic schools. Distribution of solar lamps, bicycles 
and motorbikes motivate teachers to accept postings and transfers to rural areas (MoE, 2015).  Again, in 2001 the 
government of Ghana instituted district sponsorship scheme, which was meant to support (fund) teacher trainees to 
attract  and  retain  them  to  rural  areas.    This  policy  committed  novice  teachers  to  accept  postings  to  serve  their 
respective sponsored district for a minimum period of three years (ITFT, 2010). However, sponsored teachers were 
made to refund the sponsorship when they decline postings. In effect, the policy promoted balanced distribution of 

Asian Journal of Education and Training, 2019, 5(1): 86-92 
91 
© 2019 by the authors; licensee Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
 
 
teachers in both rural and urban schools. The policy has failed in recent years due to the financial constraint of the 
country. As confirmed by participant „C‟ (Education officer):  
Since the cancellation of district sponsorship scheme, deployment of rural teachers hasn’t been flexible. Novice teachers 
feel uncommitted under any binding laws to serve in a rural school. As a District Education Office, one of our policies 
is to post teachers who are fresh from college to serve in remote areas for the first three years. Contrary, due to lack of 
motivating packages, teachers are unwilling to accept postings. The worst of it all is the recent withdrawal of trainee 
allowances  in  2015.  Most  of  them  complain  motivationally  cheated  for  sponsoring  their  own  education  while 
compelled to serve in an underserving environment.  
A  report  released  by GNAT/TEWU (GNAT/TEWU  of  Ghana  Trade  Union  Congress,  2009) on  Policy 
Recommendations  for  Achieving EFA emphatically  state  that, rural  teachers  should  be  given  additional  40% 
monetary incentives  as  a  motivation.  It is  intriguing  to  note  that  the  policy  has  not  been  considered  for 
implementation  since  2009.  However,  there  are  successful  stories  of  sister  African  countries  like  Botswana, 
Uganda, Lesotho, Zambia, and Gambia where their governments pay additional allowance to teachers in „hardship 
schools‟ to improve teacher‟s retention (ITFT, 2010).  
 
3.6. Challenges of Educational Officers: Influence of Opinion Leaders 
Furthermore,  District  Education  Office  also  faces  the  problem  of  interference  from  the opinion  leaders  in  the 
society. Favoritism and nepotism practices have become a norm in our society today. Teacher trainees who are sent 
to deprived areas are able to lobby their way out through some educational officers, chiefs, and other dignitaries to 
change their undesired posting. A district Circuit Supervisor (CS) commented: 
At  the  moment,  I  have  a  case  where  one  teacher  posted  to  a  remote  area  in  my  circuit  has  been  reposted  to  a  town 
(urban area) through the influence of an opinion leader in the community. Lots of such cases occur at the district level 
in  the  process  of  deploying  teachers. This  causes  interruption  of  teacher  stability  and  perhaps  demeans the  work  of 
human resource personal in charge of postings. Also, there are sometimes internal manipulations such as acceptance of 
bribes from trainees in order to be posted in urban schools. 
 
3.7. Poor Supervision 
Findings  from  the  study  indicated  that  there  are  poor  monitoring  and  supervision  by  the  district  education 
officers.  Trekking  officers  find  it  cumbersome  to  visit  schools  for  supervisory  purposes  due  to  lack  of  a  mobility 
facility. A district education officer said:  
Since  three  years  ago  (2013),  trekking  officers  in  my  district  have  not  received  supervisory  allowance.  We  use  our 
scanty salary for transportation to supervise teachers in rural areas. Honestly, due to lack of financial support the rate 
at which supervision should be embarked is very low compared with some years ago. Teachers are therefore not well 
monitored in their school attendance and delivery of lessons. I believe this go a long way to affect the academic success 
of the students living in such places.  
Again, it was realized from the study that, supervisors should visit schools within their district for not less than 
12 times in a term. But due to mobility challenges, supervision occurs twice in a term, which usually takes place at 
the beginning and ending of the term especially in the rural basic schools. 
 
3.8. Teacher Retention: The Way Forward 
Scrapped  allowances  of  trainees  should  be  restored  to  attract  prospective  students  to  attend  teacher  training 
colleges. Though, teacher trainees are self-funded momentarily, but the issue of endangering future enrolment has 
fully  not  been  considered.  For  instance,  prospective  students  are  more  likely  to  value  attaining  university  degree 
than college diploma. The reason is that students who are eligible to enroll in teacher colleges similarly qualify for 
four-year university degree program. It presumably makes no sense to spend their scanty resources on the former 
which has a low prestige in terms of value of certificate and job opportunities.  
Again, the District Education Office should improve on induction and mentoring programs for novice teachers. 
Mentoring programs, for example, help fresh teachers to adapt easily to their new environment especially in rural 
areas.  The  In-Service Educational Training (INSET) programs should be reinforced to help develop teachers‟ 
professional  competencies.  If  teachers  in rural  schools  achieve  job  satisfaction  with  respect  to  their  professional 
development  which  is  equivalent  to  their  counterpart  in  urban  areas,  they  will  be  more  likely  to  retain  in  rural 
schools. 
Moreover, District Sponsorship Schemes should be revisited to commit sponsored teachers to serve for at least 
three to five years in their first postings before transfers can be granted.  
Allowances  due  for  supervision  should  be  paid  on  time  to  enhance  frequent monitoring of rural teachers‟ 
attitude  towards  work  by  district  supervisors.  Education  officers  should  refrain  from  bribery  and  corruption 
attitude, which impedes effective deployment of teachers.  
Rural teachers should be given special recognition such as awards and promotion to motivate their service in 
deprived schools. Education officers should make sure that study leave is granted to deserving teachers who merit 
it.  
 
4. Conclusion 
Several  efforts  have  been  done  to  sustain  and  improve  teacher  retention  in  Ghanaian  basic  schools  but  other 
factors impede teachers‟ interest to retain in the profession. There is high attrition and absenteeism rate due to 
dissatisfaction of teachers especially those serving in underserved villages. This goes a long way to affect the lives 
of  innocent  children  who  reside  in  dilapidated  learning  environment.  To  promote  teachers  job  efficiency  in  rural 
areas,  the  government  has  to  consider  making  the  teaching  service  attractive  by  providing  accommodation, 
transport for teachers and supervisors, incentives (salary), restoration of district sponsorship schemes and teacher 
trainees‟ allowances. These policies when implemented fully will re-enforce  the  achievement  of Education  2030 

Asian Journal of Education and Training, 2019, 5(1): 86-92 
92 
© 2019 by the authors; licensee Asian Online Journal Publishing Group 
 
 
Agenda which seeks to “Ensure  inclusive  and equitable  quality  education  and  promote  life-long  learning  opportunities  for 
all” (World Education Forum, 2015). 
 
References  
Adam, S., D. Adom and A.B. Bediako, 2016. The major factors that influence basic school dropout in rural Ghana: The case of Asunafo South 
District in the Brong Ahafo Region of Ghana. Journal of Education and Practice, 7(28): 1-8. 
Agbeko,  J.K.,  2007.  Pre - service  teacher  training  and  its  challenges:  The  current  situation  in  Ghana.  NUE  Journal  of  International 
Education Cooperation, 2: 73 - 80. 
Akyeampong,  K.  and  K.M.  Lewin,  2002.  From  student  teachers  to  newly  qualified  teachers  in  Ghana:  Insights  into  becoming  a teacher. 
International Journal of Educational Development, 22(3-4): 339-352. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0738-0593(01)00059-
1. 
Asare-Danso,  S.,  2014.  Effects  of  educational  policies  on  teacher  education  in  Ghana:  A  historical  study  of  the  Presbyterian  college  of 
education. International Journal of Humanities and Social Science, 4(6): 57-65. 
Bryman, A., 2008. Social research methods. 3rd Edn., New York: Oxford University Press. 
Education Sector Performance Report, 2015. Ministry of education, Ghana.  [Accessed 15/11/2016]. 
ESPR,  2013.  Ministry  of  education,  Ghana.  Available  from www.moe.gov.gh/assets/medi/docs/FinalEducationSectorReport-2013.pdf 
[Accessed 17/11/2016]. 
FAO,    UNESCO    and    IIEP,    2003.    Education    for    rural    development:    Towards    new    policy    responses.    Available    from 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001329/132994e.pdf [Accessed 18/10/2016]. 
GNAT/TEWU of Ghana Trade Union Congress, 2009. Teacher attrition in Ghana; results of a questionnaire survey. 
Hedges,  H.,  2000.  The  importance  of  posting  in  becoming  a  teacher  in  Ghana,  a  discussion  paper.  Centre  for  International  Education 
University of Sussex Institute of Education Multi - Site Teacher Education Research Project (MUSTER). 
Hycner,  R.H.,  1985.  Some  guidelines  for  the  phenomenological  analysis  of  interview  data.  Human  Studies,  8(3):  279-303.  Available  at: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00142995. 
International  Task  Force  on  Teachers  for  EFA,  2010.  Teacher  attrition  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa:  The  neglected  dimension  of  the  teacher 
supply challenge, a review of literature. Available from 
http://www.teachersforefa.unesco.org/v2/phocadownload/teacher_attrition.pdf. 
Karsenti, T. and S. Collin, 2013. Why are new teachers leaving the profession? Results of a Canada-wide survey. Education, 3(3): 141-149. 
LeCompte, M.D. and J. Preissle, 1993. Ethnography and qualitative design in educational research. New York: Academic Press, Inc. 
Loeb, S., D. Kalogrides and T. Béteille, 2012. Effective schools: Teacher hiring, assignment, development, and retention. Education Finance 
and Policy, 7(3): 269-304. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1162/edfp_a_00068. 
Ministry of Education, 2013. Education Sector Performance Report, Ghana. Available from https://new-ndpc-
static1.s3.amazonaws.com/pubication/2013+Education+Sector+Performance+Report.PDF [Accessed 17/11/2016]. 
Ministry of Education Science and Sports, 2008. Preliminary education sector performance report. Ghana, Accra: Ministry of Education. 
MoE, 2015. Education Sector Performance Report, Ghana. Available from https://new-ndpc-
static1.s3.amazonaws.com/CACHES/PUBLICATIONS/2016/03/22/Education+Sector+Performance+Report+(ESPR)+2015_Fi
nal.pdf [Accessed 15/11/2016]. 
Mulkeen,  A.,  D.W.  Chapman,  J.G.  DeJaeghere  and  E.  Leu,  2007.  Recruiting,  retaining,  and  retraining  secondary  school  teachers  and 
principals in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank Working Paper No. 99. Washington, D.C. 
Patton, M.Q., 2002. Qualitative research & evaluation methods. 3rd Edn., Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Patton, M.Q., 2015. Qualitative research & evaluation methods. 4th Edn., Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Taylor, P. and A. Mulhall, 2001. Linking learning environments through agricultural experience—enhancing the learning process in rural 
primary schools. International Journal of Educational Development, 21(2): 135-148. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0738-
0593(00)00036-5. 
UNESCO,  2014.  National  EFA  2015  review  report:  Ghana  country  report.  Available  from  unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000231429 
[Accessed 14/11/2016]. 
UNESCO, 2015. World Education Forum, 2015 Final Report. Available from http://www.unesco.se/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/World-
education-forum-KOREA.pdf [Accessed 10/12/2016]. 
UNESCO  &  IICBA,  2016.  Teaching  policies  and  learning  outcomes  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  Issues  and  Options,  ECA  Compound,  Addis 
Ababa, Ethiopia. 
WB, 2008. Teachers for rural schools: Experiences in Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, and Uganda. Washington, DC 20433: The 
World Bank, 1818 H Street, NW. 
World     Bank,     2014.     The     World     Bank     Annual     Report     2014.     Washington,     DC.     ©     World     Bank.     Available     from 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/20093 License: CC BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO. 
World Education Forum, 2015. Final Report. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 
Paris 07 SP, France. Available from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002437/243724e.pdf [Accessed 24/07/2016]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Asian Online Journal Publishing Group is not responsible or answerable for any loss, damage or liability, etc. caused in relation to/arising out of the use of the content. 
Any queries should be directed to the corresponding author of the article.