http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         86                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
Teacher Education in Ghana: Policies and Practices 
 
Isaac Buabeng
1,*
, Forster Danso Ntow
2
 & Charles Deodat Otami
3  
1,2
Department of Basic Education, University of Cape Coast, Ghana 
3
Department of Science Education, University of Cape Coast, Ghana 
*Correspondence: Department of Basic Education, University of Cape Coast, Ghana. E-mail: ibuabeng@ucc.edu.gh 
 
Received: November 18, 2019      Accepted: January 15, 2020    Online Published: February 20, 2020 
doi:10.5430/jct.v9n1p86               URL: https://doi.org/10.5430/jct.v9n1p86 
 
Abstract 
This  article  focuses  on  teacher  education  in  Ghana.  It  examines a  number  of  reforms  involving  curricular  changes 
and  restructuring  of  teacher  education  institutions  tasked  with  the  responsibility  of  preparing  teachers  for  the  basic 
school level. The article highlights the structure and changes in Ghana’s teacher development policies and practices 
following  the  adoption  of  a  new  programme  which  took  effect  in  2018  with  the  intake  of  the  first  batch  of  4-year 
degree students in the country’s Colleges of Education. We envisage that improved teacher qualification and a 
conscious  effort  to  link  theory  to  practice  will  result  in  improved  teacher  knowledge  and  skills  required  for  a 
professional teacher. Despite this stated enthusiasm, a number of contextual issues which could negatively affect the 
intended gains from this most current reforms have been discussed. We end with a call on policy makers to address 
the contextual issues highlighted in this paper and also a need for continuity in teacher education policies in Ghana 
considering the numerous politically-related reforms. 
Keywords: teacher education, educational reforms, teaching and learning, teacher effectiveness 
 
1. Introduction 
Teacher education issues continue to receive much attention in the literature. One major reason for this has been the 
belief that students’ learning  outcomes,  especially  those  from  underprivileged  and  underserved  communities  are 
significantly influenced by their teachers. Such outcomes hinge on the educational quality and the efficiency of the 
educational system (Archibald, 2006; Darling-Hammond & Baratz-Snowden, 2005). As  a result, we argue, that the 
educational  system  of  any  nation  serves  as  a  mirror  through  which  the  image  of  its  future  can  be  seen  and  shaped 
because  it  is  from  the  school  systems  that  the  workforce  of  the  nation  are  obtained.  Therefore, Ghana’s quest at 
becoming an industrialised country depends on the quality of its citizens who are a product of its educational system. 
It may not be farfetched to appreciate why the country has undertaken a number of teacher education reforms within 
the last few decades.  
In Ghana, the vision of pre-tertiary teacher education programme is to “prepare teachers to enable them function in 
the basic and second cycle schools and to develop and nurture them to become reflective and proficient practitioners 
capable of providing quality education for Ghanaian children” (Ministry  of  Education  [MOE],  2012,  p.  8).  This 
statement  and  several  others  in  the  past  have  led  to  a  number  of  reforms  involving  curricular  changes  and 
restructuring of teacher education institutions tasked with the responsibility of preparing teachers for the early grades 
to the senior high school levels. In spite of the numerous teacher education reforms (elaborated later) that Ghana has 
experienced,  the  quality  of  teaching  and  learning  leaves  a  lot  to  be  desired  due  to  a  myriad  of  factors  such  lack  of 
policy  coherence,  mismatch  between  expectations  as  espoused  in  official  policy  documents  and  what  is  possible 
within  a  constrained  school  system  among  others.  (MoE).  This  article,  therefore, takes  a  look  at  the  policies  and 
practices that were put in place to prepare individuals to teach and ends with the current teacher education reforms 
efforts  which  are  aimed  at  preparing  teachers  with  the  requisite  teaching  competencies  to  respond  to  the changing 
needs  of  Ghana.  In  the  next  section,  we  provide  a  brief  context  of  teacher  education  in  Ghana  for  the  basic  school 
system (KG to Grade 9) highlighting some concerns with these models.  
1.1 Context of Pre-tertiary Education in Ghana  
In Ghana, pre-tertiary education comprises the basic school level (at the moment, involves kindergarten, primary and 

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         87                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
junior high schools), the second cycle level (senior high school, technical/vocational institutions) and special schools. 
The preparation of teachers to teach at the basic school level takes place in post-secondary institutions known as the 
College of Education (CoE). Currently, there are 48 Colleges of Education (CoE) in Ghana, up from 38 in 2014. The 
increase is due to the government absorbing 10 private CoE with the aim of expanding the infrastructural facilities in 
the  colleges.  These  CoE,  prior  to  the  current  reforms  which  began  in  2014,  offered  three-year  Diploma  in  Basic 
Education (DBE) programmes. However, there are also two universities (University of Cape Coast and University of 
Education,  Winneba)  which  are  traditional  teacher  education  institutions  with  the  mandate  to  prepare  teachers  to 
teach  at  various  educational  levels  including  at  the  basic  schools.    Notwithstanding  this,  some graduates,  who  are 
not  prepared  to  teach,  from  other  universities  find  their  way  to  the  classroom  to  teach  at  either  the  primary,  junior 
high,  or  senior  high  schools. The  subsequent  paragraphs provide  further details  on  the categories of  the  teachers  in 
the pre-tertiary schools. 
All teachers in the pre-tertiary education sector are categorised into professional and non-professional teachers (MoE, 
2012). The minimum teaching qualification of professional teachers for basic school level had been the Diploma in 
Basic  Education  obtained  from  an  accredited  higher  educational  institution  for  training  teachers,  i.e.  CoE.  The 
minimum teaching qualification of professional teachers for second cycle level is a Bachelor’s degree in Education 
designed  in  the  appropriate subject(s)  for  that  level,  or  a  BA/BSc  (in  a  teaching  subject)  in  addition  to  a 
post-graduate diploma in education (PGDE) or its equivalent. 
The  non-professional  teachers  are  categorized  into  two:  persons  holding  the  Senior  High  School  (SHS)  certificate 
with  three credits including English and  mathematics and persons with diploma from accredited polytechnics (now 
technical  universities)  and  university  graduates  without  certificate  in  education  (MoE,  2012). This  situation  raises 
concerns  about  the  professionalism  of  teaching  in  Ghana  considering  that  any  graduate  with  any  academic 
qualification can be employed to teach. 
Also, there are various pathways that an individual can use to enter the teaching profession as follows: 
1.  Three-year Diploma  in  Basic  Education  (DBE).  Accredited  Colleges  of  Education  (CoE)  are  responsible  for  the 
training of these teachers. Teachers from the CoE teach at the basic school level. 
2. Two-year post-DBE (for basic school teachers). The programme is designed for teachers who already possess the 
DBE.  These  teachers  get  trained  from  the  University  of  Cape  Coast  or  University  of  Education,  Winneba.  Such 
training  is  mostly  voluntary  as  at  the  time  teachers  were  not  required  to  obtain  a  Bachelors  to  teach  at  the  basic 
school level. 
3. Four-year bachelor’s degree (for both basic and second cycle schools). These are graduates from mostly the 
University  of  Cape  Coast  and  University  of  Education,  Winneba.  That  is,  while  the  CoE  prepared  teachers  who 
graduated  with  a  DBE  to  teach  at  the  basic  school  level,  the  two  traditional  teaching  universities  offered  degree 
programmes for prospective teachers at this level. 
4. Two-year DBE (sandwich) program for teachers who already possess initial professional teacher’s Certificate “A” 
3-Year post-secondary qualification. This is offered through the CoE by the University of Cape Coast.  
5. Our-year (distance education) Untrained Teacher’s Diploma in Basic Education (UTDBE) for practicing teachers 
who  have  not  received  initial  professional  teacher  training  (non-professional  teachers  with  senior  high  school 
certificate). This programme is offered in the CoE in partnership with the Teacher Education Division (TED) of the 
Ghana  Education  Service  as  an  ad  hoc  measure  to  increase  teacher  numbers  to  handle  basic schools  especially  in 
rural communities (Asare & Nti, 2014). 
From the foregoing, teacher education in Ghana has different pathways. This has led to a number of criticisms of the 
system.  The  first  criticism  has  to  do  with  the  mode  of  delivery  which  has  been described as “following traditional 
teacher  education  programme”  (Anamuah-Mensah  &  Benneh,  as  cited  by  Asare  &  Nti,  2014,  p.3).  A  second 
criticism  has  to  do with  the  lack  of  a  common  framework  to prepare  teachers  with  since  the  curricular  followed  in 
these institutions tended to be varied in nature. For example, apart from the CoE which follow a common curriculum 
developed by the Institute of Education the other pathways follow different curricular. For instance, while the CoE 
provide a yearlong  school-based  teaching practice in addition to a semester  long campus-based peer teaching, their 
colleagues  offering  an  education  degree  in  the  University  of  Cape  Coast  (UCC)  engage  in  a  semester  long 
school-based teaching experience. Such variations can have implications on the learning experiences of prospective 
teachers  such  as  ability  to  cope  with  the  complexities  of  teaching  thereby  minimising  the  reported  challenges 
beginning teachers face in schools. As such, while the differences in curricular, CoE versus universities, are good for 
innovations  in  teacher  education,  it  can  also  lead  to  very  different  teachers  being  produced  based  upon  the 

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         88                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
instructional  philosophies  of  the  various  institutions  and  whether  or  not  such  ideas  are  in  tandem  with  the  national 
aspirations in terms the ‘kind’ of teacher required to teach at the basic school level. Additionally, the fact that 
individuals with senior high school certificate can be employed to teach raises concerns about the quality of teaching 
and learning across the country and also the image of teaching.  
In  summary,  the  different  pathways  to  teaching  in  Ghana  raise  a  number  of  concerns  such  as:  1)  With  the  teacher 
education institutions using different curricular in preparing teachers to teach, are the competencies and knowledge 
being acquired by the graduates of these institutions comparable? 2) Are these curricular such that they confirm with 
a national vision of who a ‘good’ teacher is, assuming such a vision exists? 3) Can there be a national consensus on 
criteria on quality teacher indicators without sacrificing academic freedom to innovate? In the next section, we focus 
on various teacher education reforms carried out in Ghana. 
1.2 Teacher Education Reforms in Ghana 
Teacher  education  reform  initiatives  in  Ghana  have largely  been  influenced  by  socio-political  changes.  That  is, 
nearly  every  political  party  that  has  ruled  the  country  since  independence  has  engaged  in  some  form  of  teacher 
education  reforms which  were  aimed  at  preparing  qualified  teachers  to  meet  the  educational  needs  of  the  country. 
These reforms have produced different sets of teachers with different types of certificates (Anamuah-Mensah, 2006). 
Teacher  Training  Colleges  (TTC),  now  known  as  Colleges  of  Education,  initially  offered  2-year  Post-Middle 
Certificate “B” programs, followed by 4-year Post-Middle Certificate “A” and 2-year Post-Secondary Certificate “A” 
programmes.  In  the  1980s,  the  2-year  Post-Secondary  programme  was  extended  to  a  3-year  program,  but  ran 
alongside  the 4-year certificate “A” programs until  it  was  truncated  (Newman,  n.d.). However,  the  reforms  yielded 
little impact on students’ learning outcomes (MoE, 2012) such as achievement and development of critical values 
like  problem  solving.  In  recent  times,  there  have  been  two  pieces  of  major  legislation  related  to  teacher  education 
preparation which are aimed at transforming the country’s educational system.  
The  first  legislation  is  the  passing  of  the  2008  Education  Act  (Act  778).  Under  the  Act,  Section  9  called  for  the 
creation of a National Teacher Council (NTC) which has since been established. The NTC is mandated to establish 
professional  practices  and  ethical  standards  for  teachers  and  teaching,  and  registration  and  licensing  of  individual 
seeking to enter the teaching profession. The Act also empowers the NTC to withdraw the license of any teacher who 
misconducts him/herself and does not adhere to the professional code of ethics governing the teaching profession in 
Ghana.  As  such,  ACT  778  is  focused  on  making  teaching  in  Ghana  a  profession  with  clear  codes  of  ethics  and 
minimum acceptable competencies of those who get to teach at the pre-tertiary institutions in the country. 
The second legislation is the Colleges of Education Act 847 to upgrade CoE into tertiary institutions. Following this 
legislation and with effect from October, 2018 the CoE were upgraded to four-year degree awarding institutions and 
no  longer  three-year  diploma  awarding  Colleges.  Prior  to  the  enactment  and  passage  of  Act  847,  the  CoE  were 
designated  as  TTC  and  were  under  the  supervision  of  the  Ghana  Education  Service,  the  body  responsible  for 
pre-tertiary  teacher  education.  The  passage  of  the  Colleges  of  Education  Act  2012,  Act  847  has  provided  legal 
backing to their new elevated status. The colleges have since been under the National Council for Tertiary Education 
(NCTE). The NCTE is a government body responsible for the regulation of tertiary education institutions in Ghana.  
 
2. Teacher Preparation Programme Design  
Prior to the implementation of the current teacher education reforms in 2019, the preparation of pre-service teachers 
for  the basic  school  level followed  a dual mode  where  both  content  and  methodological  courses were  taken  within 
the  stipulated  period  of  the  programme.  In  this  structure,  prospective  teachers  took  a  number  of  content  courses  as 
well as the pedagogical courses concurrently. Also, the structure allowed for three types of prospective teachers – the 
generalist, who are trained to teach all subjects at the elementary level (grades 1 to 6); early childhood educators and 
the specialist teachers who are usually at the JHS. The model of teacher development is shown in Figure 1. 
Irrespective of the type of teacher to be produced, the programme design had four features. They are; 1) a number of 
content courses related to the subjects to be taught at the basic school; 2) methodology courses to equip prospective 
teachers with instructional skills to be able to handle various topics in the basic school curriculum and at a grade for 
which  they  are  been  prepared  to  teach;  3)  practicum (teaching  experience)  which  comes  in  two  phases.  The  first 
phase; often referred to as on-campus teaching practice requires prospective teachers to engage in peer teaching on 
their  campuses  for  a  semester.  This  peer  teaching  is  done  under  the  supervision of  tutors  on  the  various  CoE 
campuses  who  are  subject  specialists.  An  assumption  underlying  this  phase  is  to  provide  opportunity  for  the 
prospective teacher to teach  in  a familiar  environment thereby boosting their self-confidence as teachers. Also, this 

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         89                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
phase  allows  the  tutors  to  reinforce  what  has  been  taught  in  the  various  courses  (i.e.  content,  methodology, 
psychology   and   curriculum)   through   the   feedback   they   provide   and   also   enable   the   prospective   teachers 
modify/develop some professional competencies before going into the basic schools.  
 
Figure 1. The Phases of Teacher Development Model 
 
The  second  phase,  commonly  referred  to  as  off-campus  teaching  practice  or  field  experience,  offers prospective 
teachers the opportunity to teach in a real classroom with all its complexities. During this phase, prospective teachers 
are  supervised  by  tutors  from  their  college  as  well  as  experienced  teachers  of  their  placement  schools.  It  is 
anticipated  that when prospective teachers go through  this model of teacher development, they would  acquire deep 
knowledge  of  the  content  in  the  various  subject  areas,  become  well-versed  in  methodology  and  also  skilfully 
integrate  content  knowledge  acquired  and  the  pedagogical  knowledge  for  classroom  instruction.  The  fourth  feature 
requires  prospective  teachers  to  take  courses  in  literacy  studies  in  areas  such  as  English,  Information  Literacy, 
Computing and a Ghanaian language (mostly informed by the location of the College). 
From  the  foregoing,  it  can  be  inferred  that  the  Diploma  in  Basic  Education  programme  covered  all  the  essential 
knowledge  and  skills  that  a  teacher  requires  to  teach.  However,  there  have  been  criticisms  aimed  at  the  minimum 
entry qualification of a Diploma to teach (compared to most countries in the world which requires a minimum of a 
First  degree)  and  its  attendant  inadequate  content  considering  the  credit  requirement  for  the  award  of  a  Diploma. 
This begs the question, so where do we go from here? 
 
3.  Teacher  Preparation  and  Students’  Achievement:  What  should  be  included  in  the  Teacher  Education 
Programme?    
Educational  underachievement  has  been  associated  with  many  factors,  for  example,  socioeconomic  and  language 
background factors. However, there is increasing evidence to suggest that teacher and teaching quality is a prevailing 
predictor of students’ achievement (Darling-Hammond,  2000,  2006;  Darling-Hammond  &  Baratz-Snowden,  2005; 
Ell & Grudnoff, 2013; International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement [IEA], 2012). Over 
the  years,  researchers  have  defined  quality  teachers  as  being  those  who  form  effective  learning  relationships  with 
 
Practicum  
Professional  
courses  
Peer teaching  
(campus-based) 
 
School-based teaching 
(Off campus) 
 
Methods of teaching 
subject-specific topics 
Theories of learning 
Content courses/ Liberal 
courses  
Professional  
teacher 
 

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         90                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
students  and  teach  in  culturally  appropriate  and  responsive  ways,  and  are  able  to  overcome  all  other  influences  on 
student  achievement  (Ell  &  Grudnoff).  The  authors,  based  on  their  findings,  commented  that  to  improve  student 
achievement and/or eliminate under achievement, the quality of teaching should be improved. 
In  order  to  improve  the  quality  of  teaching,  Darling-Hammond  and  Baratz-Snowden  (2005)  outlined  three  general 
intersecting areas of knowledge that beginning teachers must acquire, and this has implications for what is included 
in  initial  teacher  education  programmes.  Firstly,  knowledge  of  learners  and  how  they  learn  and  develop  within  a 
social  context;  secondly,  understanding  the  subject  matter  and  curriculum  goals  (skill  to  be  taught)  in  light  of the 
social purposes of education; and thirdly, understanding the teaching in light of the content and learners to be taught, 
as   informed   by   assessment   and   supported   by   a   productive   classroom   environment   (Darling-Hammond   & 
Baratz-Snowden, p. 5). 
The  need  to  provide  relevant  knowledge  and  understandings  that  are  contextually  and  pedagogically  appropriate  is 
indispensable (Bailey et al., 2011; Loughran, Berry, & Mulhall, 2012). Teacher education programmes should reflect 
what is known about learning and teaching. Since the most important aim of education is to promote student learning, 
theories and ideas about learning and their application to teaching practice should be an essential part of any teacher 
education  programme  (Darling-Hammond  &  Bransford,  2005). The  evolving  concept  of  learning  has  moved  from 
reinforcement of positive learning behaviours and information processing to more active ways by which learners can 
make  sense  of  new  knowledge  using  socially  mediated  or  negotiated  ways  of  learning  can  be  explored  in  terms  of 
developing  teachers’  adaptive  expertise (Conner  &  Sliwka,  2014). For  the  above  objectives  to  be  achieved, 
Darling-Hammond  (2006) described  three  important  components  that  teacher  education  providers  should  be 
concerned  with.  These  are:  tight  coherence  and  integration  among  papers  and  between  coursework  and  practicum 
teaching  work  in  schools;  extensive  and  intensively  supervised  teaching  work  integrated  with  coursework  using 
pedagogies that link theory and practice; and closer, proactive relationships with schools that serve diverse learners 
effectively  and  develop  and  model  good  teaching  (p.  300).  She  contends  that  schools  of  education  have  to  design 
programmes  to  help  prospective  teachers  to  understand  teaching  and  learning  so  that  they  can  enact  these 
understandings in the classroom.  
Though the Ghana education system is attending well to the qualities (developing understandings of the teaching and 
learning  processes),  the  issue  of  coherence  and  integration  remains  a  challenge  for  teacher  education  providers 
Ghana.  There  is  no  specific agreement  about  the  core  content  (subject  matter  knowledge)  amongst  the  different 
providers  and  the  organisational  and  teaching  arrangements  for  student  learning  experiences.  Teacher  educators 
continue to have divided opinions over these matters.  
International  studies  about  effective  approaches  to  teaching  and  learning,  such  as  findings  from  the  OECD 
Innovative  Learning  Environments  (ILE)  Project (Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
[OECD],  2013) mean  that  adjustments  to  teacher  education are required to accommodate the needs of today’s 
learners  and  what  we  know  makes  a  difference  to  learning.  Recently,  Conner  and  Sliwka  (2014)  indicated  the 
implications  of  the  ILE  work  for  initial  teacher  education.  The  authors  argued  that  initial  teacher  education  should 
adhere to the “seven transversal learning principles” (pp. 165-166) if prospective teachers are to be effective in their 
learning environments in which they will be expected to teach. 
As  indicated  earlier  that  a  change  in  ruling  party  has  often  led  to  some  teacher  education,  the  recent  change  in 
governance  in  2016  provided  another  opportunity  to  review  and  reform  the  educational  system  including  teacher 
preparation.  A  significant  change  has  been  the  upgrade  of  existing  Diploma-awarding  CoE  into  4-year  degree 
awarding institutions. This move provided an opportunity to overhaul both the structure and content of the country’s 
teacher education programmes. Issues such as those raised by Darling-Hammond and Baratz-Snowden (2005) can be 
critically  reflected  on  in  the  design  of  the  most  recent  efforts  at  teacher  education  in  Ghana.  Issues  such  as  what 
subject matter content knowledge is needed by a basic education teacher, how to bridge the gap between theory and 
practice with its attendant apprenticeship of observation (Lortie, 1975) and developing better  relationships between 
teacher  education  institutions  and  placement  of  schools  need  to  be  attended  to.  Thus,  significant  changes  are 
imminent in the initial teacher education programmes in Ghana.  
 
4. Proposed Changes in the Teacher Education Programme 
Concerns  have  been  raised  about  the  quality  of  teaching  taking  place  in  the  Ghanaian  classrooms  as  mirrored  in 
persistent and continuous underachievement of pupils in the basic education system (MoE, 2017). In view of this, the 
Government  of  Ghana  through  the  Ministry  of  Education  in  collaboration  with  UKAid  initiated  a  project  called 

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         91                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
Transforming  Teacher  Education  and  Learning  (T-TEL). The aim of the project is to “transform the delivery of 
pre-service  teacher  education  in  Ghana  by  improving  the  quality  of  teaching  and  learning  through  support  to  all 
public Colleges of Education”. This has led to a development of National Teacher Education Curriculum Framework 
(NTECF) and National Teachers’ Standards (NTS) to guide the development of teacher education programme across 
the  country  and  also  set  minimum  professional  competencies  in  the  teaching  profession.  These  two  documents, 
NTECF and NTS, are expected to be used in developing new curricular to replace the current curriculum which has 
been in place for nearly two decades. Such a move addresses a criticism raised earlier about lack of commonality in 
the  preparation  of  prospective  teachers  in  the  various  teacher  education  systems  due  to  the  use  of  varied  curricular 
and philosophies underpinning these programmes. 
The  NTECF  has  four  pillars  constituting  the  knowledge  leading  to  the  initial  teacher  qualification.  The  proposed 
weightings for the four pillars are shown  in Table 1. Although they appear as distinct knowledge bases, there is an 
implicit understanding that these pillars are integrated to prevent any fragmentation in knowledge (Britzman, 1991). 
 
Table 1. Proposed Weighting for the Four Pillars of Initial Teacher Education 
Pillar Proposed percentage of credit hours 
K-P3 P4-6 JHS SHS 
Subject and curriculum Knowledge 25 25 40 60 
Pedagogic Knowledge 25 25 20 18 
Literacy Studies: Ghanaian Languages and English 20 20 10 5 
Supported Teaching in School 30 30 30 17 
Total  100 100 100 100 
Source: MoE (2017) 
 
The  NTECF  is  expected  to  be  practice-focused  with  30%  of  the  total  assessment  marks  being  related  to  practical 
assessments  of  teaching  competences.  Also,  it  will  focus  on  ensuring  that  teachers  are  confident  in  the  use  of 
learner-centered  approaches,  including  use  of  ICT,  to  encourage  critical  thinking  and  problem  solving.  Teaching 
practice in schools (supported teaching in the language of the new curriculum), will play a central part in the learning 
process with student-teachers spending time in partner schools in years 1, 2, 3 and 4, not just in Year 3 as is the case 
with the current Diploma. The literacy studies in Table 1 covers Ghanaian languages, English and French. Although 
Ghana is a multilingual country with 86 spoken languages and dialects, nine of the languages are taught as subjects 
in schools. In addition, French and Arabic are taught as foreign languages. Students have the option to major and/or 
minor in any of the languages taught in the schools. The NTS provides a set of expectations that should inform all 
those  involved  in  teacher  education  and  teachers  (pre-service  and  in-service)  about  the  knowledge-based  teachers 
should possess what they should do with the various knowledge-types and the values to be exhibited both in school 
and the larger community. The NTS has the following philosophy:  
Teacher education in Ghana aims to prepare teachers imbued with professional skills, attitudes and values as well as 
the  spirit  of  inquiry,  innovation  and  creativity  that  will  enable  them  to  adopt  to  changing  conditions;  use  inclusion 
strategies  and  engage  lifelong  learning.  The  teachers  are  required  to  have  a  passion  for  teaching  in  the  school 
community but also in the wider community and act as agents of change (MoE, 2017, p.10) 
The NTS is grouped into three domains, each with its own sub-group: 
a) Professional values and attitudes. The sub-groups are 1) professional development and 2) community of practice. 
b)  Professional  knowledge  with  sub-groups  being  1)  knowledge  of educational  framework  and  curriculum,  and  2) 
knowledge of learners. 
c) Professional practice with the sub-divisions being 1) managing the learning the learning environment 2) teaching 
and learning and 3) assessment. 
From  the  NTS,  what  teachers  are  expected  to  value,  know  and  do  are  incorporated  in  the  three  domains  and 
sub-divisions  that  constitute  it.  The  domains  intersect  with  each  other  with  the  aim  of  developing  a  teacher 
competent enough to teach in the Ghanaian classroom at the end their four-year training programme.  

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         92                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
This reform has led to a number of changes in the teacher development programme which took effect in 2018 with 
the  intake  of  the  first  batch  of  4-year  degree  students  in  the  CoE.    First  is  the  introduction  of  specialism  at  the 
pre-tertiary viz; Early grade level (KG -P3), Upper Primary (P4-P6), JHS and SHS. This is a marked change in how 
teachers  have  been  prepared  over  the  years.  In  the  last  few  years  prospective  teachers  from  the  CoE  could  be 
categorized  into  three  groups  namely:  generalists  who  were  expected  to  teach  all  school  subjects  at  the  primary 
school, the specialists including mathematics and science teachers, and early childhood teachers. The introduction of 
the  four  areas  of  specialism  means  that  prospective  teachers,  ultimately,  will  be  licensed  to  teach  at  very  specific 
grade-bands within the elementary and middle school levels. Some of the anticipated benefits from such a move are 
to enable: 1) prospective teachers to acquire deep knowledge within a specified grade-band; 2) extensive knowledge 
and experiences within the chosen grade-band or specialism (MoE, 2017).  
Second, the minimum entry requirement for teaching is Bachelors in Basic Education and no longer Diploma. Since 
October  2018,  all  new  entrants  to  the  CoE  are  admitted  to  pursue    Bachelor  in  Basic  Education  programmes.  The 
upgrade  from  Diploma  to  Degree  means  an  increase  in  credit  weightings  and  hence,  courses  to  take  thereby 
providing opportunities for prospective teachers to deepen their content knowledge. Such a move may help address 
some  of  the  concerns  about  the  adequacy  of  the  content  knowledge  teachers  possess  as  a  proxy  to  the  quality  of 
teaching. Additionally, there are clearly defined teaching standards to help bench-mark the quality of teaching. Again, 
the  NTECF  is  intended  to  guide  all  universities  offering  teacher  education  in  their  development  of  programmes  so 
there  is  a  shared  vision  of  the  kind  of  teacher  Ghana  needs.  While  the  demand  to  follow  a  common  framework  in 
developing  teacher  education  programmes  may  stifle  curricular  innovations  the  advantage  is  the  near  similarity  in 
design  thereby  minimizing  any  variations  and  teacher  competencies  as  pertains  in  countries  without  a  national 
curriculum or framework. It also ensures that the quality of learning a student experiences is not due to the institution 
his or her teacher graduated from. 
Furthermore, there is a change in how the field experience component is organized. In the new teacher development 
model prospective teachers are to engage in what is referred to as supported teaching in school (Pillar 4, see Table 1) 
throughout the eight semesters of study. This implies that prospective teachers get to familiarize themselves with the 
professional aspect of teaching while taking various courses at college. That is, student teachers, right from the first 
year, first semester, will start to acquire teaching experiences through regular school-based practicum to observe and 
also  co-teach  with  a  more  experienced  in-service teacher.  This  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  old  model  of  teacher 
development  where  supported  teaching  (practicum),  the  on-campus  segment  happens  for  a  semester  during  the 
second year of the three-year programme with the off-campus occurring for the whole of the third year, which is the 
final  year  of  the  programme.  Such  a  design  in  learning  to  teach,  if  properly  organised,  can  provide  immediate 
reinforcement of the theory being learned in the CoE as the prospective teachers visit the schools and come back to 
campus to share their experiences for the needed theoretical underpinning and possible strategies to address them.  
Assessment strategies have also changed. In the new framework, there is strong emphasis on formative assessment to 
support learning. Globally, many teacher education programmes have shifted to criterion-based forms of assessment 
and  use  of  professional  standards  and  rubrics  as  a  basis  for  formative  assessment  in  teacher  education  due  to 
standard-driven  reforms (Conner  &  Sliwka,  2014).  Portfolios,  in  which  prospective  teachers  document  and  reflect 
upon their own learning, have become more common. The NTECF prescribes specific assessment for each pillar of 
the curriculum. The student teachers are to be assessed within the three domains of NTS and aligned to the pillar of 
the  curriculum  framework  such  that  at  the  end  of  the  four  year  training  they  would  have  acquired  subject  specific, 
pedagogical and assessment skills to teach at the age, ability and aptitudes of the learners they are being trained for. 
At  the  heart  of  the  strategies  for  assessment  is  the  creation  of  a  professional  portfolio  which  should  include:  1) 
evidence  of  learning from  the  training  institution  in  the  form  of  assignment,  examinations  and  lecture  notes  and  2) 
evidence of learning from in-service school in the form of lesson plans, study notes, resources, assessment records, 
learner exercise books, evaluation form from mentors among others. It is expected that prospective teachers who are 
still  learning  to  teach  would  be  realistically  and  fairly  assessed  against  the  teaching  standards  with  particular 
emphasis  on  their  creative  and  innovative  skills  as  well  as  their  possession  of  identified  professional  values  and 
attitudes. 
The  National  Teaching  Council,  NTC,  has  also  commenced  the  licensing  of  the  teaching  profession.  Once 
student-teachers have completed their 4-year Bachelor of Education degree, they will then spend one year teaching in 
the  basic  schools  (pre-tertiary  level),  after  which  they  will  receive  their  license  to  practice  and  achieve  qualified 
teacher status. 
 

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         93                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
5. Implications and Conclusion 
Ghana  is  one  of  the  African  countries  whose  learners  perform  exceptionally  poorly  in  international  benchmark 
assessments with  teacher quality being a concern (Buabeng, Owusu, & Ntow, 2014). The International Association 
for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement [IEA] (2012) highlights poor quality of teaching and teachers’ poor 
content  knowledge  as  some of  the  contributing  factors.  Hence,  any  efforts  to  upgrade  the  quality  of  teachers at  the 
basic  school  level,  as  depicted  by  the  NTECF  and  NTS  should  be  welcome  news.  The  introduction  of  the  NTECF 
and NTS has the potential to bring about some level of improvement in the quality of teachers that are produced by 
the various teacher education institutions and classroom instructional practice. Improving the quality of teachers and 
the  image  of  the  teaching  profession  in  Ghana  is  inevitable.  There  is  the  need  for  a competency-based  approach 
which  recognises  teaching  as  interplay  of  knowledge,  skills,  values  and  attitudes  to  raise  learning  standard  to  be 
adopted as captured in the NTS document. We envisage that improved teacher qualification will result in improved 
knowledge  (CK,  PK  and  PCK)  and  skills  required  for  professional  effectiveness.  Despite  this  stated  enthusiasm, 
there are some contextual issues which could negatively affect the intended gains from the current reforms.  
The  first  issue  has  to  do  with  the  capacity  of  tutors  teaching  in  the  various  CoE.  At  the  moment,  not  all  the  tutors 
have   a   research-based  masters’  degree,  a  minimum  requirement,  to  teach  at  that  level.  This  inadequate 
research-based preparation of the tutors could affect their ability to supervise project work (long essays) considering 
that the ‘new’ Ghanaian teacher  is  expected  to  be  a  reflective  practitioner  who  engages  in  small-scale  inquiry  to 
address local issues. The project works are vital in building the capacity of pre-service teachers to identify and design 
solutions  to  classroom  problems  by  engaging  in  action  research.  It  is  envisaged  that  prospective  teachers  will  see 
teaching as a lifelong endeavour where the teacher is constantly seeking solutions to classroom-based challenges by 
conducting some basic research in their classrooms and schools. To achieve this goal will require tutors who have the 
expertise to provide support for the teacher trainees so that they are equipped with the necessary research skills.  
A second issue regarding the tutors’ capacity is whether or not they have the competency to teach  undergraduate 
level  courses.  All  along,  the  tutors  have  been  teaching  diploma  courses  and  so  with  the  introduction  of  more 
advanced  topics  in  the  curricular  as  well  as  new  courses  to  the  degree  programme  (due  to  an  increase  in  credit 
weighting  from  68  credits  to  at  least  165  credits)  they  are  expected  to  have  the  required  academic  background  to 
effectively teach at that level. For instance, although the tutors possess a Master’s degree, some of them have their 
degrees in subject areas which  are different from the programme of study at their bachelors which  is referred  to  as 
‘skirt and blouse’ in Ghana. A possible effect is that the affected tutors may have to rely on their first degree 
knowledge to teach a bachelor’s degree student which is undesirable. There  is  therefore  a  need  for  intensive  and 
regular  in-service  training  (INSET)  programmes  to  empower  the  tutors  to  teach  both  the  content  and  philosophies 
underpinning  the  teaching  of  the  various  area  specializations  and  specific  courses.  Even  for  those  who have  the 
required master’s degree in their teaching subjects, there is still a need for INSET to enable them teach especially the 
new courses introduced which they may have forgotten because they were not teaching those topics. 
A  third  issue  that  should be attended  to has  to  do  with  lesson delivery. We  argue  that this  is where  the bulk  of  the 
work  is.    Radical  changes  in  teaching  are  called  for  if  the  visions  as  outlined  in  the  NTS  and  NTECF  are  to  be 
attained.  In  this  regard,  the  content  courses  should  be taught  in  ways  that  would  make  envisioned  and  privileged 
pedagogy visible to the prospective teachers. The tutors have to model this privileged pedagogy where students are 
actively involved in the teaching and learning situation so that the prospective teachers have new images of teaching 
markedly  different  from  what  they  might  have  experienced  as  students  at  the  basic  and  senior  high  school  levels. 
This calls for the setting up of instructional laboratories which are well-equipped with relevant teaching and learning 
materials  in  the  institutions  for  teacher  training.  The  teaching  of  pedagogy  courses  should  involve  the  requisite 
teaching  and  learning  materials  for  the  prospective  teachers  to  see  these  materials  and  learn  how  to  use  them  and 
even  wean  their students  of  them  as  they  begin  to  think  abstractly.  Also,  the  dual  mode  of  delivery  which  treated 
content  as  being  separate  from  pedagogy  should  be  discarded.  The  tutors  teaching  the  content  should  see  that  the 
content  is  embedded  in  the  pedagogy  used  what Britzman  (1991)  refers  to  as  the  separation  of  content  from 
methodology. 
The  fourth  critical  issue  has  to  do  with  the  placement  schools  that  will  be  used  during  the  supported  teaching 
component  of  the  four-year  programme.  Considering  that  a  number  of  schools  in  some  areas  are  hard-to- reach, 
poorly equipped and with inadequate trained staff (UTDBE pathway), there is a need for careful selection of schools 
with well-qualified  teachers  to provide mentoring  for the prospective teachers. With the new vision  for teaching as 
espoused in the NTS, there is a strong need for capacity building for the in-service teachers in the schools of practice. 
This will ensure that the mentoring provided by the cooperating supervisors (those in the placement schools) to the 

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         94                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
prospective teachers is complementary and reinforces what has been provided them in their CoE. Otherwise, there is 
a  strong  possibility  of  these  prospective  teachers  being  counter-socialised  by  the  in-service  teachers  as  they  come 
face-to-face with the challenging conditions some of them teachers find themselves in. This also raises the issue of: a) 
how  are  schools  selected  to  serve  as  placement  schools  (partner  schools)  for  the  CoE  students  to  observe  and 
possibly learn from? b) Who gets to be a mentor in these placement schools, that is, what should be the qualification 
or  credentials  of  such  mentors? Currently,  there  is  no  official  mentoring  policy  in  place  to  address  these  and  other 
concerns.  It  appears  that  prospective  teachers  may  find  themselves  in  schools  where  the  mentor  maybe  in  more 
training than the supposed mentee especially as more and more students have to be placed in schools. 
Again, as required that all prospective teachers of all the CoE from levels 100 to 400 be on supported teaching every 
semester,  this  has  the  potential  to  disrupt  the  calendar  of  the  schools  they are  placed.  There  is  therefore  a  need  to 
ensure that in the quest to provide real classroom context that enables teacher trainees to appreciate the complexity of 
teaching  thereby  avoiding  the  apprenticeship  of  observation  phenomenon  (Lortie,  1975),  teaching  and  learning 
activities do not suffer unduly. 
In  conclusion,  the  current  teacher  education  reform  has  potential  to  transform  teaching  as  envisaged.  However, 
without  the  right  mechanisms  in  place  such  as  model  schools  for  prospective  teachers  to  learn  best  practices  from, 
radically  different  pedagogies  being  adopted  by  College  tutors,  and  an  attitudinal  change  by  all  stakeholders,  this 
reform may well be replaced by another reform in case of a change in government due to the challenges enumerated 
in this paper. 
 
References 
Anamuah-Mensah,  J.  (2006).  Teacher  education  and  practice  in  Ghana.  In  T.  R.  Kolawole  &  P.  Kupari  (Eds.), 
Educational issues for sustainable development in Africa (pp. 28-40). Lasonen Johana: Institute for Educational 
Research. 
Archibald, S. (2006). Narrowing in on educational resources that do affect student achievement. Peabody Journal of 
Education, 81(4), 23-42. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327930pje8104_2 
Asare, K. B., & Nti, S. K. (2014). Teacher education in Ghana: A contemporary synopsis and matters arising. SAGE 
Open, 4(2), 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244014529781 
Bailey,  J.,  Blakeney-Williams, M., Carss, W., Edwards, F., Hāwera, N., & Taylor, M. (2011). Grappling with the 
complexity  of  the  New  Zealand  curriculum:  Next steps  in  exploring  the  NZC  in  initial  teacher  education. 
Waikato Journal of Education, 16(3), 125-142. https://doi.org/10.15663/wje.v16i3.40 
Britzman, D. P. (1991). Decentering discourses in teacher education: Or, the unleashing of unpopular things. Journal 
of Education, 173(3), 60-80. https://doi.org/10.1177/002205749117300305 
Buabeng, I., Owusu, K. A., & Ntow, F. D. (2014). TIMSS 2011 science assessment results: A review of Ghana’s 
performance. Journal of Curriculum and Teaching, 3(2), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.5430/jct.v3n2p1 
Conner,  L., & Sliwka, A.  (2014).  Implications  of  Research  on  Effective Learning  Environments  for Initial  Teacher 
Education. European Journal of Education, 49(2), 165-177. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12081 
Darling-Hammond,  L.  (2000). Teacher  quality  and  student  achievement:  A  review  of  state  policy  evidence. 
Education policy analysis archives, 8(1), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.v8n1.2000 
Darling-Hammond,  L.  (2006).  Constructing  21st-century  teacher  education. Journal  of  Teacher Education,  57(3), 
300-314. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022487105285962 
Darling-Hammond,  L.,  &  Baratz-Snowden,  J.  (2005). A  good  teacher  in  every  classroom:  Preparing  the  highly 
qualified teachers our children deserve. San Fransisco, CA: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Ell, F., & Grudnoff, L. (2013). The politics of responsibility: Teacher education and “persistent underachievement” 
in New Zealand. Educational Forum, 77(1), 73-86. https://doi.org/10.1080/00131725.2013.739023 
International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement [IEA]. (2012). In M. O. Martin, P. Foy, & 
G.  M.  Stanco  (Eds.), TIMSS  2011  international  results  in  science.  Chestnut  Hill,  MA:  TIMSS  &  PIRLS 
International Study Center. 
Lortie, D. C. (1975). Schoolteacher: A sociological study London: University of Chicago Press. 
Loughran,  J.  J.,  Berry,  A.,  &  Mulhall,  P.  (2012). Understanding and Developing ScienceTeachers’ Pedagogical 

http://jct.sciedupress.com Journal of Curriculum and Teaching Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                         95                          ISSN 1927-2677  E-ISSN 1927-2685 
Content Knowledge (2nd ed.). Boston: Sense Publishers. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-6091-821-6 
Ministry  of  Education.  (2012). Pre-tertiary  teacher  professional  development  and  management  in  Ghana:  Policy 
framework. Accra: Ghana Education Service. 
Ministry  of  Education.  (2017). National  teacher  education  curriculum  framework:  The  essential  elements  of  initial 
teacher education. Accra: Author. 
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  [OECD].  (2013). Innovative  learning  environments   
Paris: Educational Research and Innovation, OECD Publishing.