Consortium for Research on
Educational Access,
Transitions and Equity
Access to Basic Education in Ghana:
politics, policies and progress
Angela W Little
CREATE PATHWAYS TO ACCESS
Research Monograph No. 42
August2010
The Institute of Education
University of London, UK

The   Consortium  for   Educational   Access,   Transitions  and   Equity  (CREATE)   is  a   Research  Programme
Consortium supported by the UK Department for International Development (DFID). Its purpose is to undertake
research designed to improve access to basic education in developing countries. It seeks to achieve this through
generating new knowledge and encouraging its application through effective communication and dissemination
to   national   and   international   development   agencies,   national   governments,   education   and   development
professionals, non-government organisations and other interested stakeholders.
Access to basic education lies at the  heart of development. Lack of educational access,  and securely acquired
knowledge and skill, is both a part of the definition of poverty, and a means for its diminution. Sustained access
to meaningful learning that has value is critical to long term improvements in productivity, the reduction of inter-
generational cycles of poverty, demographic transition, preventive health care, the empowerment of women, and
reductions in inequality.
The CREATE partners
CREATE is developing its research collaboratively with partners in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. The
lead partner of CREATE is the Centre for International Education at the Universityof Sussex. The partners are:
The Centre for International Education, University of Sussex: Professor Keith M Lewin (Director)
The Institute of Education and Development, BRAC University, Dhaka, Bangladesh: Dr Manzoor Ahmed
The National University of Educational Planning and Administration, Delhi, India: Professor R Govinda
The Education Policy Unit, University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa: Dr Shireen Motala
The Universities of Education at Winneba and Cape Coast, Ghana: Professor Jerome Djangmah,
Professor Joseph Ghartey Ampiah
The Institute of Education, University of London: Professor Angela W Little
Disclaimer
The research on which this paper is based was commissioned by theConsortium for Research on Educational
Access,   Transitions   and   Equity   (CREATE   http://www.create-rpc.org).   CREATE   is   funded   by   the   UK
Department  for  International  Development  (DFID)  for  the  benefit  of  developing  countries  and  is  coordinated
from the Centre for International Education, University of Sussex. The views expressed are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of DFID, the University of Sussex, or the CREATE Team. Authors are responsible for
ensuring  that  any  content  cited  is  appropriately  referenced  and  acknowledged,  and  that  copyright  laws  are
respected. CREATE papers are peer reviewed and approved according to academic conventions. Permission will
be  granted  to  reproduce  research  monographs  on  request  to  the  Director  of  CREATE  providing  there  is  no
commercial benefit. Responsibility for the content of the final publication remains with authors and the relevant
Partner Institutions.
Copyright © CREATE 2010
ISBN: 0-901881-49-X
Address for correspondence:
CREATE,
Centre for International Education, Department of Education
School of Education & Social Work,
Essex House, University of Sussex, Falmer BN1 9QQ, United Kingdom
Tel:+ 44 (0) 1273 877984
Fax:+ 44 (0) 1273 877534
Author email:A.Little@ioe.ac.uk
Website:http://www.create-rpc.org
Emailcreate@sussex.ac.uk
Please contact CREATE using the details above if you require a hard copy of this publication.

Access to Basic Education in Ghana:
politics, policies and progress
Angela W Little
CREATE PATHWAYS TO ACCESS
Research Monograph No.42
August2010

ii

iii
Contents
Preface.......................................................................................................................................vi
Summary..................................................................................................................................vii
1. Introduction............................................................................................................................1
2. Progress in Access to Basic Education..................................................................................3
3. The Pre-Independence Period................................................................................................5
4. Transition to Independence....................................................................................................7
5. Educational Policy and Military Governments......................................................................8
6. The 1987 Education Reforms...............................................................................................12
6.1 Policy Context................................................................................................................12
6.2 Policy Implementation and Resistance..........................................................................14
6.3 Technical Challenges.....................................................................................................16
6.4 Tensions between Technical and Political Imperatives.................................................18
6.5 Formal Evaluations........................................................................................................19
6.6 Political Will..................................................................................................................21
7. Sustaining Implementation of the 1987 Reforms in a New Democracy..............................22
8. Parallel Policies and Plans, 2000-2008................................................................................27
9. The International Dimension of Educational Policy............................................................31
9.1 The Donor Assistance Community................................................................................31
9.1.1Finance.....................................................................................................................31
9.1.2 Discourse.................................................................................................................32
9.1.3 The Sector Wide Approach (SWAp)......................................................................33
9.2 World Conferences.........................................................................................................35
10. The Presentand the Future.................................................................................................38
11. Conclusions........................................................................................................................42
11.1 Progress in Basic Education.........................................................................................42
11.2 Policies for Basic Education........................................................................................42
11.3 Political Regimes and Education Policies....................................................................44
11.4 Political Will................................................................................................................44
11.5 Drivers and Inhibitors of Reform Implementation.......................................................44
Appendices...............................................................................................................................48
List ofTables
Table 1: Proportions of children aged 7, 14 and 5-17 years who were currently attending
school by region and survey round, 1991, 1998 and 2006.........................................................4
List of Figures
Figure 1: Enrolment projections c. 1934....................................................................................6
Figure 2: Costs per student by education level..........................................................................6

iv
List of Acronyms
ADPAccelerated Development Plan
AFRCArmed Forces Revolutionary Council
BECEBasic Education Certificate Examination
BESIPBasic Education Sector Improvement Project
CEECommon Entrance Examination
COTVETCouncil for Technical and Vocational Education and Training
CPPConvention People’s Party
CWIQCore Welfare Indicators Questionnaire
DFIDDepartment for International Development (UK)
DHSDemographic and Health Surveys
EFAEducation for All
EFA-FTIEducation for All Fast Track Initiative
ERPEconomic Recovery Programme
ESPEducation Strategic Plan
fCUBEfree Compulsory Universal Basic Education
GDPGross Domestic Product
GERGross Enrolment Ratio
GESGhana Education Service
GLSSGhana Living Standards Survey
GNATGhana National Association of Teachers
GoGGovernment of Ghana
HERPHealth and Education Rehabilitation Project
ICTInformation and Communication Technology
INSETIn-service Education and Training
JHSJunior High School
JICAJapan International Co-operation Agency
JSSJunior Secondary School
MICSMultiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MOESSMinistry of Education Science and Sports
NDCNational Democratic Congress
NECNational Education Commission
NEFNational Education Forum
NERNet Enrolment Ratio
NLCNational Liberation Council
NPPNew Patriotic Party
NRCNational Redemption Council
NCSENew Structure and Content of Education
ODAOverseas Development Administration (UK)
OPECOrganisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries
PNDCProvisional National Defence Council
PNPPeople’s National Party
PPProgress Party
PSDPrimary School Development
SHSSenior High School
SSSSenior Secondary School
SSSCESenior Secondary School Certificate Examination
STMEScience Technology Mathematics Education
SWAPSector-Wide Approach
UNICEFUnited Nations Children’s Fund
UPEUniversal Primary Education

v
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to colleagues in Ghana who gave of their time so generously to share with me
their  reflections  on  the  politics,  policies  and  progress  of  basic  education  inGhana.  Unless
quoted from their published writings I refer to their views by ‘interview with author’, and not
by interviewee name.
I am very grateful to Professor Jerome Djangmah and Dr Kwame Akyeampong who assisted
me in setting up the interviews, to Dilrukshi Weeraratne for her patient transcription of many
hours of interview material, to Stephen Adu for his comments on progress towards manifesto
pledges  since  the  2008  election  and  to  Caine  Rolleston  for  his  editing  of  the  text  and  his
general assistance on the paper. I am also grateful to Professor Djangmah, Dr Akyeampong
and Dr Ato Essuman for comments on earlier drafts of this work.

vi
Preface
Ghana  was  well  known  for  its  high  levels  of  access  to  education  relative  to  other  West
African States in the1960s. By the mid 1970s growth in participation had stalled and a series
of political events including military government and global recession had derailed attempts
to ensure that every Ghanaian child received a full cycle of primary schooling. Moreoverlong
standing  differences  in  access  to  education  between  the  North  and  the  South  remained
entrenched  and  may  even  have  grown  despite  various  initiatives  to  reduce  the  gaps  in
participation.
This  Research  Monograph  tells  the  story  of  how  over  30  years  patterns  of  access  have
changed.  The  various  policy  events  that  have  shaped  progress  are  identified  and  analysed,
with a special focus on the post 1987 reforms for Free Compulsory Universal Basic Education
(FCUBE)  and  the  political  economy  of  their  implementation.  Part  of  this  story  is  one  of
fluctuating political will accompanied first by rapid gains in access through the 1990s which
reached  a  plateau  in  the  first  years  of  the  new  millennium.  Another  part  relates  to  the
consistent  engagement  of  development  partners  in  supporting  the  ambitions  of  FCUBE,
alongside the tensions that inevitably exist in relationships between donors and recipients.
Importantly the analysis highlights several developments that have more general relevance to
the experience of otherSub Saharan African countries in various ways. There are concerns
that growth in participation may have stalled in the 2000s for several reasons that include the
difficulties of reaching the last 20% of primary age children especially in the North, increased
numbers  of  overage  children  especially  from  poorer  households,  and  softening  demand  at
junior  secondary  level  amongst  those  unlikely  to  progress  to  senior  secondary  school.
Nevertheless there have been gains, not least in the reduction in differences between girls and
boys.  Capitation  grants  have  been  used  to  provide  fee  free  schooling  but  this  has  not
prevented schools from beginning to collect other monies in various ways. The initial gain in
enrolments may not be sustained. Though the focus of concernfor selection has now shifted
from entry to junior secondary to entry to senior secondary, it is clear that pressures related to
high stakes examinations remain important in constraining the curriculum and providing fuel
for the growth of private tuitionand demand for private schools, both of which disadvantage
the poorest.
This  analysis  gives  real  insight  into  the  swings  of  policy  and  political  will  which  have
accompanied efforts to meet government obligations to educate every child. At the centre of
the story lie the actors that influenced events at key points in the evolution of participation,
complemented by the underlying drivers of growth which illustrate how political will is often
necessary but not sufficient to ensure sustained achievement of universal access to education.
There are many lessons in this for other countries sharing the same goals.
Keith Lewin
Director of CREATE
Centre for International Education
University of Sussex

vii
Summary
This monograph examines the history and politics of educational reform in Ghana, focusing
on the issue of access to basic education in the post-colonial period.The monograph employs
data  from  a  series  of  interviews  conducted  with  senior  policy-makers,  implementers  and
researchers, as well as drawing on documentary sources, to explore the drivers and inhibitors
of  change  at  the  political,  bureaucratic  and  grass-roots  levels.It  describes  the  patterns  of
change in relation to enrolment and outlines the key policies adopted through from the British
colonial  administration  to  the  various  independent  regimes,  authoritarian  and  democratic.
Progress  in  universalising  access  has  been  substantial  and  basic  education  indicators  in
Ghana, both  in early post-colonial times and today,  stand out positively when compared  to
most countries in sub-Saharan Africa.The study explores the nature of the domestic political
and administrative machinery which has enabled comparative success in enrolment growth in
Ghana,  attending  also  to  the  importance  of  political  will  as  well  as  toshifting  patterns  of
international and donor influence.
The study draws out key tensions in education policy making, including tensions between the
goals  of  access,  equity,  quality  and  relevance;  those  between  academic  and  vocational
orientations;  thosebetween  elite  and  popular  interests  and  those  between  political  and
technical imperatives.The processes of reform begun by the Kwapong and Dzobo committees
and continued through to the fCUBE policy are examined in detail and the underlying aims
and  objectives  of  these  processes  are  shown  to  share  a  number  of  common  although
sometimes  mutually  conflicting  features.Interview  data  allow  a  nuanced  interpretation  of
both impetus and resistance to policy formulation and implementation.The reforms of 1987
areshown  to  be  critical  in  the  development  of  the  universal  basic  education  policies  that
emerged subsequently and those later policies are considered partly as responses to unrealised
objectives from 1987.
Following  the  restoration  of  democratic  governmentin  Ghana,  the  establishment  of  a
constitutional  commitment  to  universal  basic  education  in  1992  provided  a  lasting  and
binding  responsibility  for  the  state,  which  was  followed  by  a  comprehensive  policy  in
fCUBE.Subsequently  education  policy  has  played  animportant  role  in  political  manifesto
pledges.The  monograph  concludes  by considering the  election  pledges  of  the  2008  Ghana
Government,  their  provenance  and  initial  indications  of  their  implementation  and  finally
summarises its findings on progress and on the importance of policy, regime, political will,
and  the  drivers  and  inhibitors  of  reform  implementation  in  relation  to  the  pursuit  of  basic
education for all in historical perspective.

viii

1
Access to Basic Education in Ghana:
politics, policies and progress
1. Introduction
Ghana,  formerly the  Gold  Coast,  gained  full  independence  in  1957.  During  the  1950s  and
1960s her education system was the envy of much of the rest of sub-Saharan Africa. Access
to  basic  education,  indicated  by  enrolment  rates,  increased  over  the  decades,  especially
between 1991 and 1998. It levelled off between 1998 and 2006, increasing again thereafter
following the introduction of the‘capitation grant’designed to relieve parents of the burden
of  paying  tuition  fees  in  public  schools.  Since  the  early  1950s  a  number  of  policies  to
increase  access  to  all  levels  of  educationhave  beenimplemented,  several  of  which  are
described in CREATE’s Country Analytic Review on Ghana (Akyeampong et al, 2007).
Major policy initiatives in basiceducation in Ghana are numerous. Most commentators on the
history of educational policy in Ghana agree that each successive policy text owes much to
the policy themes set out in earlier texts. Recurring policy themes include the provision of
free educationand the need for a practical, vocationally oriented education. The call for free
primary  education  goes  back  to  at  least  1951,  and  that  for  practical,  vocationally-oriented
education to as early as 1847, during the British colonial period.Recurring policyconcerns
include  access,  quality  and  costs,  with  varying  emphases  at  different  points  in  time.  A
recurring  policy  tension  has  been  that  between  expansion  of  access  and  the  quality  of
education, reflecting the tension between CREATE’s Zones of Exclusion in which, in Zone 1
children are excluded from enrolling in school and in Zone 3 are excluded from meaningful
learning in school, once enrolled (Lewin, 2007)
The most radical reforms of basic education in the second half of the twentieth century are
generally  agreed  to  have  been  those  set  out  in  the  report  of  the  Commission  chaired  by
Professor Dzobo in 1973/4. The Dzobo report recommended a restructuring of the secondary
school system and  a reorientation of the curriculum towards vocational skills. The reforms
were implemented selectively and on an experimental basis. It was left to the new military
government of 1981 to renew the push for their comprehensive implementation through the
1987 reforms. By 1992, the right to free and compulsory education was enshrined in the new
constitution,   heralding   another   implementation   push   from   1995   through   the   ‘Free,
Compulsory  and  Universal  Education  by  2005  Programme’,  known,  more  commonly,  as
fCUBE.fCUBE was linked closely with the Dzobo Commission proposals of 1974and the
1987 reforms. As one of the case study interviewees explained
1974  was  ...the  blueprint...86  was  when  the  government  came  in  and  said  ‘we
would do it, implement it’. fCUBE 1996 was when it said ‘let’s correct some of the
things, amend some of theissues that some of the problems that were raised by the
people who were against it...about (let’s correct) how it affects quality. And let us
also    deepen    some    of    the    structures’.    fCUBE    deepened    the    structure    of
decentralization. Decentralization was key. So ...74 set the blue print, 86/87 came in
to  implement  it;  and  95/96  fCUBE  came  to  consolidate,  to  strengthen  it  (interview
with author).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
2
Thismonograph explores the politics, policies and progress in access to basic education in
Ghana since independence through primary and secondary evidence. The primary source of
evidence is a set of interviews with fifteen Ghanaian policy-makers, policy implementers and
researchers  who  have  played  various  roles  in  Ghana’s  education  history  over  the  past  35
years.  Theyinclude  senior  government  political  appointees,  senior  civil  servants,  vice
chancellors and university staff, trade union officials and district directors of education. Most
interviewees have played various roles in policy formulation and policy implementation over
many  years.  A  particular  effort  was  made  to  interview  and  meet  those  involved  in  the
formulation of the 1986 and 1996 education reforms policies and implementation.Interviews
were tape recorded and transcribed. Evidence from interviews is supplemented by a range of
documentary  sources.  These  include  published  histories  of  education  in  Ghana,  research
reports,  policy  documents,  commission  and  committee  reports,  evaluation  studies  and
conference papers.
The monographaddresses 5 main questions:
What progress has there been in access to basic education over the past 30 years?
What policies for access to basic education have been promoted?
What  role  have  political  regimes  played  in  the  formulation  of  policies  on  access  to
basic education?
What role has political will played in the process of policy formulation?
What have been the drivers and inhibitors of the implementation of reforms in basic
education since 1987?
The monograph offers a brief review of education policy during the political regimes of the
British period, the transition to independence (1951-1957), democratic independence (1957-
1969)  and  the  first  three  military  regimes  (1972-1981).  It  explores  in  greater  detail  the
process   of   policy   formulation   of   the   1987   Education   Reforms   and   the   1996   Free,
Compulsory,  Universal  and  Basic  Education  ProgrammeFCUBEand  the  drivers  and
inhibitors of the implementation of these policies.The international dimension of policy, in
particular   the   role   of   the   international   donor   community  and   world   conferences   and
declarations, is explored for their role in policy formulation and implementation.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
3
2. Progress in Access to Basic Education
Progress in access to basic education is conventionally assessed through gross, net and age-
specific enrolment ratios. Time periods and the data sources used in various evaluations vary,
rendering complex what should be a simple story. In a favourable assessment of educational
progress between the 1950s and the 1980s the World Bank (1989) commented:
Despitea  more  than  doubling  of  the  population,  enrollment  rates  at  all  levels  have
increased significantly, the number of schools and colleges has increased several fold,
the number of teachers has grown considerably faster than that of students, and real
unit cost allocations at all levels have fallen dramatically (World Bank, 1989:vi).
The  pattern  of  enrolment  growth  over  time  was  not  consistent,  however,  and  economic
decline  which  began  in  the  1970s  impacted  negatively  on  basic  education  provision,
especiallyin  the  latter  part  of  the  1970s  and  into  the  early  1980s.Grossenrolmentratios
(GER)in primary education continued to rise throughout most of the 1970s, but began to fall
steadily at the turn of the decade and into the early 1980s (Colclough, Lewin andChiswick
1993).Between 1987 and 1991 the GER in primary education increased from 76% to 79%,
fell back to 73% in 1997 before increasing to 80% by 2001 and decreasing again to 78% in
2003  (Thompson  and  Casely-Hayford,  2008:1).  An  evaluation  of  educationalprogress
undertaken  by  the  World  Bank  suggested  that  between  1988  and  2003  there  was  aten%
increase  in  enrolment  in  basic  education,  a  reduction  in  dropouts  and  an  increase  in  girls’
enrolment. Primary school graduate rates of illiteracy in English declined from 66% to less
than  20%,  while  school  infrastructure  and  the  availability  of  textbooks  and  other  learning
materials increased markedly over the same period (World Bank, 2004:36).
GERs disguise the numbers of over-age and under-age children in an education system. The
Ghana Living Standards Surveys (GLSS) offer an age specific snapshot of school attendance.
Amongsevenyear olds the proportion attending school increased from 71% to 84% between
1991 and 1998 and remained constant at 84% between 1998 and 2006. Among fourteen year
olds the proportion increased from 77% to 86% between 1991 and 1998 and dropped back to
81% by 2006. Among those aged betweenfiveand 17 the proportion increased from 71% to
81%  between  1991  and  1998  and  remained  constant  between  1998  and  2006  (Rolleston,
2009).
National GERs also belie differencesbetween social groups. The GLSS4 survey found that
83% of girls and 86% of boys aged 6-11 were enrolled in school in 1998. By the time of the
GLSS5 survey in 2006 these figures hadincreased to 85% for both boys and girls. But it is
the  interaction  of  enrolment  with  poverty  that  is  more  illuminating.In  2006,  the  greatest
discrepancies between girls and boys lay among the poorest urban quintile where girls out-
enrolled boys by 83% to 69% and among the middle quintile where boys out-enrolled girls by
98% to 93% (Rolleston, personal communication). Of even greater concern is the decline in
educational  participation  among  the  poorest  between  1998  and  2006.  Among  all  boys  and
girls,  rural  boys  and  girls  and  urban  boys  and  girls  participation  rates  among  the  poorest
quintile have declined, while in every other income quartile participation rates have increased
(Akyeampong, 2009:185).Since fCUBE was designed to introduce free basic education and
expansion of access to the poorest these findings are of particular concern.
Another area of current concern is the apparent decrease in participation experienced in the
Northern  regions  between  1998  and  2006.  Table  1  shows  the  proportions  of  children  aged

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
4
sevenyears, 14 years and 5-17 years who were enrolled in school at the time of three nation-
wide Ghana Living Standards Surveys (GLSS) undertaken in 1991, 1998 and 2006.
Table1:Proportions of children aged 7, 14 and 5-17 years who were currently
attending school by region and survey round, 1991, 1998 and 2006
Age 7Age 14Total age 5-17
GLSS
3
1991
GLSS
4
1998
GLSS
5
2006
GLSS
3
1991
GLSS
4
1998
GLSS
5
2006
GLSS
3
1991
GLSS
4
1998
GLSS
5
2006
Western0.760.910.940.770.910.830.750.890.89
Central0.740.860.920.780.930.880.710.850.90
Greater Accra0.810.920.910.880.950.870.820.870.89
Eastern0.830.750.830.900.790.870.800.800.79
Volta0.730.900.880.790.890.940.770.870.86
Ashanti0.830.930.970.810.880.840.790.860.89
Brong Ahafo0.820.850.910.880.930.820.790.880.86
Northern0.460.700.520.440.680.580.440.600.55
Upper West0.350.690.630.310.680.580.340.640.60
Upper East0.220.690.690.480.570.640.320.570.64
Total0.710.840.840.770.860.810.710.810.81
Source:Rolleston (2009) computed from GLSS 3, 4 and 5
Table 1 suggests that in the threenorthern regions of Upper East, Upper West and Northern,
educational  participation  among5-17  years  olds  increased  between  1991  and  2006.  The
greatest advance was made between 1991 and 1998, with a subsequent decrease in two of the
three  regions  between  1998  and  2006,  during  the  early  period  of  fCUBE  implementation.
Why this is happening is not entirely clear and will be discussed subsequently.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
5
3. The Pre-Independence Period
Education  traditions  in  Ghana  go  back  centuries.  But  the  origins  of  the  the  current  basic
education  structure  in  Ghana  owes  much  to  its  colonial  past.  Between  the  fifteenth  and
nineteenth  centuries  French,  Portuguese,  Dutch  and  English  traders  and  settlers  provided
limited education access, especially in the coastal areas, a legacy which has lived on into the
present. Christian missions were also active in the education field. Between 1821 and 1840
the  British  Crown  authorities  financed  a  number  of  government  schools,  including one  for
girls.  Both  government  and  church-funded  schools  were  based  on  the  public  ‘monitorial’
schools then current in England (Foster, 1963:49). Educated unemployment emerged as early
as 1850 when the supply of educated  school leavers seeking ‘modern’  colonial sector jobs
exceeded  available  opportunities.  Between  1881  and  1901  the  number  of  schools  grew.  In
1901 61 schools were associated with the Basel and 49 with the Wesleyan Christian missions,
compared  withsevengovernment  run  schools.  Education  was  the  privilege  of  a  small
minority, largely elite, male and urban and residing in the South of the country. In general,
the social demand for education remained low (Foster 1963:79).
All  in  all,  education  at  this  period  did  not  become  essentially  part  of  a  coherent
Government  policy.  The  pattern  that  emerged  was  a  group  of  Government  aided
schools as well as a large number of unaided ones, some of which from time to time
asked   the   Government   for   money.   There   was   no   definite   pattern   of   school
distribution, either. Schools sprang up wherever the need was expressed for them, and
wherever  the  townsfolk  showed  a  genuine  desire  to  help  in  their  running(Graham
1971:103).
Schooling for girls remained limited and provided mainly by the missions. Curricula for girls
focused  on  social  accomplishments  such  as  needlework  and  dress  making,  were  oriented
towards marriage and reflected curricula in middle classschools for girls in England at the
time.  But,  as  Graham  (1971:133)  also  pointed  out,  the  role  of  women  in  Ghana  was  quite
unlike  that  of  women  in  England  at  that  time.  Ghanaian  women  were  and  are  more
independent of their husbands.
From  1919  there  wasa  marked   change  in  government  policy.  Governor  Guggisberg
established  16  guiding  principles  for  the  development  of  education.  These  stressed  equal
opportunities  for  boys   and   girls,  co-education   in  certain  stages,  the   importance  of  a
vernacular  education  as  the  base  for  English  education,  the  provision  of  trade  schools  to
equip young men with craft skills and high quality teachers. The principles did not include
free and compulsory basic education. Educational expansion was cautious and limited by the
supply of trained teachers (Akyeampomg et al, 2007:4). In 1925 the Committee of the Privy
Council  recommended  that  school  curricula  should  have  a  stronger  technical/agricultural
orientation in order to develop a thriving agricultural economy (Foster, 1963:54-58).
By the  1930s,  education  planners  were  projecting  student  enrolments  based  on  past  trends
and  costs.  Figure  1  indicates  that  between  1911  and  1937  the  enrolment  of  pupils  in
government and aided schools increased from around 18,000 to 44,000. With an estimated
school  age  population  of  740,000  it  was  calculated  that  it  would  take  600  years  before  all
were in school (Figure 1). Based instead on the growth in the percentage of the school-age
population enrolled in school it was calculated (Figure 1) that itwould take 3,500  years to
achieve a GER of 100%! Figure 2 indicates that the costs to the government per student by
level of education ranged from £3.9 at the primary level, to £24.6 at secondary to £66.7 at

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
6
college  level.  The  pupil  projections  were  basedon  very  slow  and  unplanned  growth  of
enrolment in governmentandin aided schools in the past andin a context wheregovernment
policy to speed up enrolment and raise revenue for educationwas weak.
By 1945/6 the colonial government had set out atenyear education plan designed to enrol all
children in primary education by 1970.
Figure1:Enrolment projections c. 1934
Source: University of London Archive, Senate House Library
Figure2:Costs per student by education level
Source: University of London Archive, Senate House Library

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
7
4. Transition to Independence
In  1951  a  legislative  assembly  was  elected,  marking  the  transition  from  colonial  rule  to
independence  for  what  was  still  known  at  that  time  as  the  Gold  Coast.  The  transitional
government  was  led  by  Dr  Kwame  Nkrumah  and  his  Convention  People’s  Party  (CPP).
Educational  access  was  more  extensive  than  in  any  other  Africanterritory  apart  from  the
Union of South Africa. However, literacy levels were very low, estimated at below 20% of
the population. Geographical inequalities in educational provision between the north and the
south of the country were marked. The educational system showed:
marked structural similarities to that of the metropolitan power. Superimposed upon
an  expanding  primary  network  were  a  few  highly  selective  academic  secondary
schools together with a very limited provision of alternative types of schools offering
technical  instruction.  As  in  the  earlier  stagesof  English  educational  development,
direct  government  provision  of  schools  was  negligible,  and  government  action  was
primarily concerned with offering grants-in-aid to institutions developed by voluntary
agencies (Foster, 1963:170).
The authors of the Accelerated Development Plan (ADP) for Education of 1951 proposed a
massive expansion of provision for primary and middle school education. The plan laid down
a  revised  structure  for  general  education  comprising  six  years  of  primary,  four  years  of
middle schools, five years of secondary and two years of sixth-form education. This structure
was introduced gradually and became the blueprint for the system until the 1970s when the
structure of the middle and secondary schools was experimented with and until the late 1980s
when the structurewas changed more fundamentally.
Under the ADP,  Teacher Training Colleges were opened  and ‘pupil teachers’  were  trained
while  in  service.  The  ADP  introduced  tuition  fee-free  primary  education  and  undertook
‘emergency’  trainingof  large  groups  of  teachers.  The  emphasis  was  on  an  expansion  of
access  to  education  for  all  groups  in  society.  The  authors  of  the  ADP  introduced  the  term
‘Universal Primary Education’ (UPE) into the policy discourse. Enrolment growth was rapid.
In  1957,the  Gold  Coast  and  British  Togoland  were  unified.  In  1960  Nkrumah  became
President  of  the  First  Republic  of  Ghana  led  by  the  socialist  Convention  People’s  Party
(CPP). As a result of the growing regional gap in educational access scholarships for primary,
secondary and tertiary education were introduced for children from the regions of thenorth
and from parts of Brong-Ahafo. The Education Act of 1961 made primary and middle school
education, referred to as elementary education, fee-free. Parents were required to contribute a
modest sum for textbooks (Addae-Mensah et al 1973:5). In the six years between 1960/1 and
1966/7 enrolment in public elementary schools more than doubled. By the early 1960s social
stratification  in  access  to  education  in  Ghana  was  already  clear.  By  the  early  1970s  only
aboutfivepercentof those who entered primary made the transition to secondary education
for which tuition fees continued to be charged (Addae-Mensah et al, 1973:16). The son of a
secondary  school  educated  man  and  a  university  educated  man  had  17  and  32  times
respectively the chance of entering secondary education as the son of an illiterate. Moreover
the  general  quality  of  education  available  to  the  masses  was  low,  due  mainly  to  the  large
numbers of untrained and poorly trained teachers (Foster, 1965).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
8
5. Educational Policy and Military Governments
In  1966,  Nkrumah  was  deposed  in  acoup  d’étatled  by  the  military.  The  new  military
government  of  the  National  Liberation  Council  (NLC)  and  its  Chairman,  Major  General
Ankrah, appointed  an Educational Review Committee under the  chairmanship of Professor
A.A. Kwapong. The rapid expansion of access to education in the 1960s was raising concerns
in some quarters about the low quality of educational provision. This led to calls to decelerate
plans to expand enrolments and to focus on quality. Unemployment among educated schools
leavers  was  surfacing  as  a  problem  and  ‘alleged  interference  by  politiciansin  educational
matters  were  blamed  for  a  relaxation  in  discipline  in  schools’  (National  Education  Forum,
1999:6). Indeed one of those who overthrew Nkrumah, A.A.Afrifa, is quoted as justifying
the coup in part because of the havoc wrought by rapid education expansion and the lowering
of educational standards during Nkrumah’s period (Afrifa, 1966 cited in Pedley and Taylor,
2009).
The Kwapong committee recommended that after two  years of middle school, a portion of
students  should  be  selected  for  the  academic  stream  in  the  secondary  school.  Those  not
selected would follow a pre-vocational course of two further years in ‘continuation’ classes.
The committee’s report also recommended that a long-term objective for the system should
be a course of six years at primary school, four years of secondary education, and two years
of  sixth-form  leading  to  three  or  more  years  at  university.Although  the  introduction  of
‘continuation school’ was intended to meet the demand for education relevant to the world of
work, its implementation reinforced social divisions between rich and poor as it channelled
poorer children into an inferior education oriented to lower status jobs. Under this reform it
was still possible to enter the academic secondary stream directly with a strong performance
in  the  Common  Entrance  Examination  (CEE).  One  unintended  result  of  the  policy was  an
expansion  in  the  number  of  private  primary schools  oriented  to  academic  selection  via  the
CEE.
In 1969, parliamentary elections brought the right-leaning Progress Party (PP) to power with
Dr Kofi Busia as Prime Minister. This government promoted an anti NLC and anti-Nkrumaist
stance. It adopted a liberalised economic system, devalued the Ghanacediby almost half and
deported large numbers ofNigeriansand others under the ‘Aliens Compliance Order’ (1969)
which  provided  for  the  removal  of  immigrants  without  proper  documentation  within  two
weeks. Public resistance to Busia’s government grew rapidly. In 1971, a series of proposals
for  education  reform  were  made.  Anothermilitary  coup  intervened  before  they  could  be
implemented.
The second militarycoup d’état, in 1972, brought the National Redemption Council (NRC)
to  power.  While  the  education  policy  discourse  had  shifted  between  1966  and  1970  to  a
concern with education quality, it was clear that attention to quality rather more than general
levels of access was favouring the educational chances of the elite and ruling classes. By the
early 1970s educational access had resurfaced as a prime concern. By now, it was theissue of
access to secondary rather than primary school that had moved centre-stage.
Educational research was being used in the policy discourse to promote a renewed emphasis
on access. Addae-Mensah et al.(1973) explored the relationship between familybackground,
educational opportunity and performance in CEE. They demonstrated that children who had
attended what were termed ‘special primary schools’ (i.e. private schools) typically made the
transition to secondary after onlysixorsevenyears of primary education, whereas most of

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
9
those attending the government-funded schools who passed the exam did so only aftereight,
nineortenyears  of  primary  and  middle  school.  In  1972,  21%  of  students  from  special
primary schools appeared among the first 1,000 best performing candidates, compared with
less  thanonepercentof  students  from  government  schools.Successful  candidates  from
special schools entered the high reputation secondary schools disproportionately. Many of the
middle classes used the private primary schools to give their children a head start in the race
to gain access the best government secondary schools via the CEE without recourse to the
middleschool. Access to secondary education was not only unequal across the social classes
but it was also inequitable.
In 1974 the Dzobo Committee on education recommended a ‘New Structure and Content of
Education’ (NSCE).  It drew on several of the proposals made first by the 1971 committee
that had worked during the time of Busia’s progress party. The NSCE proposed a common,
diversified and extended basic education cycle in which all children would follow a common
curriculum for nine  years, six  in primary schools and three in the newly establishedjunior
secondary schools (JSS), followed by four years ofsenior secondary school(SSS) split into
two  stages  of  two  years  each.  The  recommendation  was  partly  motivated  by  concerns  in
relation to equity which had surfaced following the appearance of favourable routes through
the  basic-school  system  for  those  ableto  access  better  quality  education  (often  through
private schooling) at the earlier stages, which afforded a considerable selection advantage at
secondary-level.
The former ‘middle schools’ were  to be removed from the structure, reducing the  notional
maximum length  of  the  school  system  from  17  years  to  13  years.  It  was  intended  that  the
‘middle  schools’  be  ‘converted’  intojunior  secondary  schools,  which  would  provide  a
curriculum akin to the first three forms of the traditional secondary schools.At thesame time,
the  committee  also  recommended  that  the  curriculum  be  made  more  practical  and  skills-
oriented,  through  pre-technical  and  pre-vocational  subjects  in  both  the  primary  and  junior
secondary stage. In order to implement the new reforms the Ghana Education Service (GES)
was established, bringing together teachers, administrators and other education personnel into
a unified service under the Ministry of Education.
The proposals encountered many implementation challenges. Although 118 experimental JSS
were established between 1974 and 1986, this plan was not extended to the whole country.
There was considerable resistance to the JSS concept, not least from among the middle-class
bureaucrats of the newly established GES. A member of the subsequent 1987 reforms central
committee explained that the main resistance flowed from the middle class bureaucrats rather
than the middle classes as a whole. The bureaucrats were:
afraid  of  losing  their  power  and  their  authority.That’s  why–human  nature.They
were very conservative, they were resisting change (interview with author).
The  implementation  of  the  Dzobo  committee  proposals  was  also  undermined  by  a  lack  of
financial  resources.  Oil  price  hikes,  low  levels  of  domestic  and  foreign  investment  and
general economic decline saw the percentage of government revenues spent on education fall
from 6.4%to 1.5%between 1976 and 1983(World Bank, 2004:7). Shortages of teaching and
learning materials in schools impoverished the quality of the education system.Many trained
teachers  migrated  to  Nigeria  for  work  in  its  fast-growing  oil-based  economy.  Growth  in
enrolment in all stages of education was slower  than the growth in the relevant population
age groups and:

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
10
the decay of those parts of the system patronised by themass of the population was so
marked that it was doubtful whether children were learning anything. More than half
the  teachers  were  untrained,  there  were  virtually  no  textbooks  in  the  schools,  there
was  no  inspection  or  supervision,  and  the  few  resources  available  were  used  to
employ  superfluous  staff  rather  than  purchase  essential  educational  materials.  In
addition pilferage and theft has reached endemic proportions (World Bank, 1989:vi).
As  well  as  a  lack  of  financial  resources,  one  official  at  the  timereflected  on  the  lack  of
political will to implement the proposals (interview with author).
The  introduction  ofjunior  secondary  schools  with  a  three-year  cycle,  in  the  presence  of
resourcing difficulties including in terms of facilities and adequately trained teaching-staff,
has ledto believe that theyhave served to replicate or even to worsen the inequality inherent
in  the  former  middle-school  system  (interview  with  author).The  newjunior  secondary
schools  (which  had  been  formermiddle  schools)  couldnot  prepare  pupils  to  the  standard
achieved in the former academic secondary schools.Equivalence at the end of Form Three
between new JSS and old secondary schools was defined by the reforms, but not realised in
practice.Previously, the academic secondary schools comprised pupils who had passed the
Common  Entrance  Examination,  and  these  schools  were  considerably  better  resourced,
especially  in  terms  of  teachers  who  were  typically  university  graduates,  compared  to  the
former middle-school teachers who were typically post-secondary trained.Comparing the old
and new ‘elite’ and ‘mainstream’ routes through  the system, commentators note that under
the  new  system  it  was  the  mainstream  pupil  whosede  factopre-tertiary  preparation  was
significantly reduced.Thepotential to access ‘academic’ secondary schooling after two, three
or four years ofmiddle school(eight,nineortenyears of basic education) was removed and a
common cycle of 9 years of basic education imposed.The elite continued to avail themselves
of access to private preparatory schools and either high quality former secondary (now JSS)
or private JSS schools (interview with author).
For some, it was the failure to ensure the quality of state primary schooling in terms of pre-
secondary  preparation  and  the  failure  to  ensure  quality  improvements  in  the  ex-middle
schools that served to perpetuate and reinforce inequality in the post-Dzobo system.This was
caused, the argument goes, by those among the elite bent on reforming a system they did not
intend to use for their own children and the doubts expressed, particularly among bureaucrats
in  the  GES,  stemmed  rather  more  from  concerns  about  widening  inequality  under  the
proposed reforms than from vested interests.Moreover, some argue that the reforms were not
supported by a majority of the elite, whose interests were well served by the old system, but
that certain powerful elites allied themselves with reforms supported by the World Bank for
reasons  associated  with  their  own  political  interests,  recommending  a  system  of  improved
equityde  jurebut  which,  in  line  with  the  concerns  of  the  rest  of  the  elite  and  among  the
bureaucrats, was to result in potentially greater inequity de facto(interview with author).
In 1979 the third military coup brought Flight Lieutenant Rawlings to power as Chairman of
the  Armed  Forces  Revolutionary Council  (AFRC)  for  a  brief  period.  The  AFRC  aimed  to
purge  corruption  and  graft  from  the  armed  forces  and  wider  society.  After  elections  in
September  1979,  power  was  handed  overto  Dr  Hilla  Limann  of  the  social  democratic
People’s National Party (PNP). The PNP government lasted for just over  two  years before
Rawlings led Ghana’s fourth, and his second,coup d’état,assuming power with his left-wing
Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC). The economy remained in a dire state and by
1982 per capita incomes were 30% below their 1970s level, import volumes were one third

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
11
less and export earnings just half (World Bank,1989). The economy was very weak, and the
prospects of reformin education poor.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
12
6. The 1987 Education Reforms
6.1Policy Context
The character of political will and the availability of financial resourceswere to change in the
mid 1980s. After leading his second military coup Rawlings had expected financial support to
flowinfrom  socialist  countries  and  the  Eastern  Bloc  in  his  efforts  to  counter  economic
decline.  When  this  support  did  not  materialise,  he  turned  to  the  World  Bank  and  the
International Monetary Fund, launching the Economy Recovery Programme (ERP) in 1983
(Pedley and Taylor, 2009). The ERP included currency devaluation, reductions in tariff levels
and  import  restrictions,  increased  prices  for  export  crops,  retrenchment  of  public  sector
employment and increased levels of government expenditure. With GDP growth of 6.3% per
annum, the early economic gains were substantial (World Bank, 1989).
Alongside the ERP came a political agenda that was anti-elitist, pro-poor, pro-rural: in short
populist.  Radical  reforms  in  education  were  aimed  at  improving the  quality of  educational
provision and at more equitable access to primary and secondary education. Much of the ERP
focussed on the rural economy.
The PNDC government realised that if the ERP was to succeed, the skill and attitudes
of  Ghanaianyouth  would  have  to  be  changed  so  that  they  would  be  prepared  to
become productive farmers or skilled artisans and craftsmen ready to work for their
own, their community’s and their country’s development (World Bank, 1989:2).
The low quality of educationin the early 1980s has been described by many, including the
National Education Forum (NEF), which, in 1999 offered a retrospective.
By 1983, Ghana’s  educational system, which until the mid-1970s was known to be
one  of  the  most  highly developed  and  effective  in  West  Africa,  had  deteriorated  in
quality. Enrolment rates, once among the highest in the sub-Saharan region, stagnated
and fell. The percentage of GDP allocated to education dropped from 6.4 percent in
1976 to 1.7 percent. The real levels of financing fell by about two-thirds. Government
resources  were  no  longer  available  to  construct,  complete  or  maintain  educational
facilities.  Scarcity  of  foreign  exchange  affected  the  country’s  ability  to  purchase
textbooks  and  other  teaching  and  learning  materials.  The  economic  downturn  also
resulted  in  the  mass  exodus  of  qualified  teachers.  At  the  basic  education  level,  the
ratio of trained to untrained teachers fell significantly. Low motivation and morale led
to  ineffective  supervision.  Finally,  the  lack  of  data  and  statistics  needed  for  vital
planning led to decisions being taken on anad hocbasis (National Education Forum,
1999:9).
In its retrospective assessment of the same period, but published some ten years earlier, the
World Bank provided a witheringand harsh description of the state of teaching and learning
in the early 1980s, not inconsistent with that offered by the National Education Forum. The
authors of the report commented on the limited number of school hours and days available
for student learning, the  absence of  learning materials and the  low level of literacy among
gradesixcompleters.  They  went  on  to  comment  very  unfavourably  on  the  quality  and
motivation of teachers and school administrators.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
13
...the  school  has  been  seen  by  unscrupulousadministrators  as  a  way  of  placing
relatives  or  friends  in  salaried  employment,  even  when  the  prospective  teacher  is
semi-literate himself and his post not justified according to student numbers...The
job of circuit officer (inspector) has generally been considered a sinecure, offered as a
reward  to  long  serving  teachers  with  no  precise  job  description  or  clear  duties.
Teachers would only turn up to school when it suited them and consequently student
attendance was generally low and dropout rates high. Teachers would often demand
that students work on their farms which led parents to withdraw their children from
school (World Bank, 1989:18).
An early policy reform by the PNDC in 1983 was the promulgation of the PNDC Law 42.
The Ghana Education Service Council and the National Council for Higher Education were
dissolved  and  their  statutory  powers  transferred  to  the  PNDC  Secretary  (equivalent  to  the
term Minister in an elected parliamentary government). In 1983 a conference of Directors of
Education  reviewed  the  Dzobo  report  and  made  recommendations.  In  1985  a  National
Education  Commission  (NEC)  on  education  was  established  to  advise  the  Secretary.  The
commission held extensive consultations across the country that involved  trade unions, the
heads  of  secondaryschools,  civil  servants  and  university  students.  Technical  advice  from
foreign  consultants  and  the  World  Bank  was  employed  alongside  technical  advice  from  a
wide range of Ghanaian professionals. In essence, the NEC’s recommendations echoed those
made nineyears earlier by the Dzobo committee under the military regime of the National
Redemption Council. The challenge now was their implementation.
The  NEC’s  work  was  soon  taken  over  by  the  Ministryof  Education.  Indeed  some  would
describe the take-over as anaggressive political move by the Ministry of Education and in
particular by one of thedeputysecretaries ofeducation.
...as  the  commission  was  working,  all  of  a  sudden  the  thendeputysecretary  for
education  took  charge  of  the  reform  in  a  very  aggressive  way  and  therefore  this
commission was sidelined...So it was I would say so aggressive that there was some
kind of resistance.People felt that there was indeed a need for reform, there was no
question about it but the pace at which the reform was going Ithink looked too fast
for  people...But  it  was  a  military  government  so  there  wasn’t  anything  like  say
democracy  or  anything.And  so  she  set  up  some  committees  operating  within  the
ministry and  in  fact  thesecretary herself  was  not  actively involved  (interview  with
author).
The revolutionary, military political regime under which the 1986/7 reforms were formulated
and  driven,  was  markedly  different  from  that  of  earlier  periods.  The  process  of  policy
formulation   brought   professional   experts,   several   from   the   university  sector,   into   the
decision-making  arena  and  conferred  political  powers  on  them  asministers  ordeputy
ministers. Some of those who were centrally involved in the policy dialogue recalled:
this was a government that saw itself as a revolutionary government...and in it were
people who had a lot of ideas about how to get us ...out of the economic crunch and
the social consequences of the economic crunch.So that was from the very top ...and
...the people who were ministers were often technocrats with a passion for change
and ...who wanted to reformulate things and see how to make them more with a few
resources. We were the sort of people who thought that the universities should have
farms, that sort of thing (interview with author).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
14
When the PNDC government came into power and...it was all political...this mass
movement. Everybody then was interested in seeing issues in their right perspective
...And  all  of  us  agreed  that  something  drastic  had  to  happen  for  education...the
drive in policy was increaseaccess (interview with author).
The  1987  reforms  were  designed  to  overcome  many  maladies  in  education-both  in
improving access to education, especially to the junior secondary stage,  and improving the
quality of education and learning. Wide ranging in scope and covering the entire education
sector from primary to tertiary level, the key basic education elements with implications for
education access reflected the much earlier 1974 proposals of the Dzobo committee. Indeed,
most  commentators  agree  that  the1987  reforms  were  an  attempt  to  put  into  practice  the
recommendations of the 1974 proposals which, in turn, owed their roots to a 1971 committee
appointed by Dr Busia.The 1987 reforms were of four main types.
Structure  of  Education:Reduce  the  pre-university  span  from  17  years  to  12  years.
Replace the primary (6), middle (4) and secondary school (5) structure with primary
(6), junior secondary (3) and secondary (3). Introduce non-selective basic education
across the primary and junior secondary stages (6+3).
Curriculum:Provide  children  with  literacy  skills  intheirown  language,  a  second
Ghanaian  language  and  English,  modern  farming  skills,  familiarity  in  using  tools,
manual  dexterity,  practical  mathematics.  Create  positive  attitudes  to  hard  work  and
national development. Restructure teacher education.
Expected destinations of graduates from basic education:The majority of graduates
from  basic  education  were  expected  to  become  productive  modern  farmers  (with
support   from   agricultural   extension   services);   a   substantial   number   to   become
productive  skilled  workers  (with  short  term  training  or  informal  apprenticeships);
30% to proceed to secondary education.
Finance of Education:Concentration of resources on basic education. Savings to be
made by reducing length of pre-university course from 17 to12 years; redeployment
of  unnecessary  non  teaching  and  unqualified  teaching  staff;  charging  of  book  user
fees from Grade 3; the removal of boarding and feeding subsidies for secondary and
tertiary  institutionsand  removal  of  student  subsides  in  tertiary  education.  (World
Bank, 1989).
6.2 Policy Implementation and Resistance
The reforms were announced by thesecretary foreducation andculture in October 1986 for
implementation from September 1987. Their initialimplementation was handled firmly and
decisively.  Leadership  from  the  top,  comprising  thesecretary  foreducation,  thedeputy
secretary  forbasic  andsecondaryeducation  and  thedeputysecretary  forhighereducation
was strong.
The detailed planning ofthe reforms and their implementation occurred in parallel for most
of the 1987-1992 period. The PNDC government wasted no time in moving to country-wide
implementation, just eleven months after the reforms had been announced.The reforms were
not  piloted  and  were  introduced  nationwide  ‘with  less  than  a  year’s  lead  time  in  order  to
prevent vested interests from mobilising against the reforms’ (World Bank, 1989:2). Vested

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
15
interests in maintaining the structure and content of education were anticipated to lieamong
the elite who had for some time gained considerable advantage for their  own children in a
socially  stratified,  urban-oriented,  academic  and  selective  education  system.  Despite  the
political determination to embark on implementation ‘money or no money’, external financial
support was necessary. The World Bank stepped in early to support the reform process. In
1984-5  initial  education  sector  analytical  and  planning  work  as  well  as  essential  school
materials  were  provided,  followed  by substantial  education  sector  credits  between  1986-91
and 1990-94 to support the reforms (World Bank, 2004:20).
The decision to introduce the reforms with less than year’s lead time points to a well-known
tension between the technical and political imperatives of educationreform. Most education
policy implementers stress the need to trial and pilot reforms in order to test their technical
characteristics and take corrective action before going to scale. Politically, reforms are often
pushed  through  hard  and  fast  to  circumvent  resistance  and/or  to  secure  electoral  support.
Pushed too fast the political imperative can backfire and create tensions in the early stages of
implementation.
The reforms met with resistance from several quarters. Those in the driving seat were aware
that  the  middle  classes  and  associated  political  groups  from  earlier  regimes  would  resist
components of the reforms. Already, the middle classes’ resistance to a common system of
secondary education that  would place their  children in  a common  race for educational and
occupational opportunities had thwarted reform efforts in the 1960s and the 1970s. But the
political scene had changed. Since the PNDC’s political base was the rural poor, it did not
fear the middle classes.
Students  resisted  proposed  reformsin  higher  education.  These  were  dealt  with  firmly  and
universities were closed for periods of time. The PNDC government had relied on students
for  their  support  initially.But  since  universities  and  the  students  within  them  were  widely
regarded  as  elitist,the  government  did  not  feel  threatened  by  the  anticipated  loss  of  their
support(World Bank, 2004:29-30).
Resistance to the general education reforms also came from the middle class bureaucrats in
the (GES). Once again the government acted firmly.
...the  Secretary  for  Education  told  the  GES  that  if  they  are  not  prepared  for  the
implementation of the reform they will all be removed from office by revolutionary
order (interview with author).
This  demonstrated  the  government’s  determination  to  overcome  resistance  by  all  means
possible, it transferred three important units from the GES-Supplies, Curriculum Research
and Development and Planning, Budgeting, Monitoring and Evaluation-to theministry. The
army was mobilised to distribute textbooks to the new JSS. Some GES officials were charged
with corruption. A formerdirectorgeneral of the GES at that time recalled the way in which
the GES was sidelined by both government and the World Bank.
I  was  hardly  consulted.The  World  Bank  people  were  part  of  theproblem.They
preferred really the political heads... they made a b-line to the political heads. They
ignored  thedirectorgeneral  and  I should have  resigned...But...that  would have
been (seen a) a case of sabotage.That’s how they would have looked at it.There was
no way I could explain myself (interview with author).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
16
Anticipated  resistance  from  the  regional  administrations  was  bypassed  largely  by  the
establishment  of  the  newly  establisheddistrict  Assemblies.  Thedistrictassemblies  were
expected to raise public awareness of the reforms, mobilise funds and oversee the massive
school building programme.
Overt  resistance  to  the  reforms  was  muted.  Military  regimes  typically  wield  power  in  an
authoritarian way. Orders are orders, directives are directives.Debate is stifled. People do not
speak out and are intimidated. As a university academic who was played a key role in the
educational reform commented:
This was a directive.So it was easier.And you know the direction...whether people
like  it  or  not  they don’t  mind  the  other  opposing views.It  can  come  but  it  doesn’t
matter (interview with author).
Resistance to the reform  from the middle classes was certainly present, but it was passive.
Those who resisted did not speak out at public discussions aboutthe reforms. Instead, they
found  ways  of  by-passing  the  new  system.  Many  middle  class  children  attended  private
primary  schools  and  sat  the  CEE  a  year  early.  In  this  way  they  entered  the  traditional
secondary school directly rather than wait a year and proceed to secondary via the new JSS.
This practice was also followed by the children of some, but not all, members of PNDC. The
practice of using the private primary schools to gain subsequent advantage within the public
secondary and tertiary systems continues to the present day (Djangmah, 2009:1).
6.3Technical Challenges
As implementation moved forward, a number of challenges were faced, some technical and
some political. Technically, some felt that change was being pushed too fast, with insufficient
attention  being paid  to  detail.  While  controversial  reforms  for  the  financing of  universities
were  leading  to  student  protests,  university  staff  expressed  their  concerns  about  the  likely
impact of the reforms on basic and secondary education and the qualityof university student
intake.
Suddenly we decided that aftersixyears everybody must transit into something that
ought to beequivalent to a secondary school...Ideally this was perfect, excellent if
every  child  in  the  country  could  have  education  to  thelevel  of  what  we  would
consider  to  be  secondary  education.It  would  boost  the  intellectual  level  of  all
children.Unfortunately over 80% of the schools in the country in the public system
were  the  so-called  middle  schools...transformed  overnight  to  juniorsecondary
schools but they were nothing more than glorified middle schools.Suddenly schools
where one person was teaching every subject in a class in the middle school became a
junior secondary school.And the same teacher was supposed to teach various subjects
-mathematics, English,geography,history-to a level that ought to be equivalent to
what used to be secondary schoolForm 1 in the old system. Naturally that affected
standards (interview with author).
An evaluation by a British volunteer teacher-educator working in thenorth during the earliest
years  of  the  reform  confirmed  the  burdens  on  teachers  (Scadding,  1989).  Because  the  JSS
curriculum had been extended to thirteen subjects, teachers were now obliged to teach four
subjects where previouslythey had taught two and felt under increased pressure to cover the
official  syllabi.  A  compulsory  two  week  training  course  conducted  country-wide  in  the

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
17
summer  of  1987  was  judged  by  teachers  to  be  inadequate,  especially  in  relation  to  the
teaching  of  thespecifics  of  particular  subjects.  The  sense  of  isolation  was  acute  among
teachers  in  the  rural  and  sparsely  populatednorth.  The  innovative  pedagogic  methods  of
continuous  assessment,  group-work  and  inquiry-based  learning  posed  particular  challenges
for teachers. There were worries too about the overwhelming emphasis on the JSS stage to
the detriment of the first six years of primary where the foundations of formal learning and
the  foundations  for  the  JSS  stage  are  built.  Early  concerns  were  also  expressedabout  the
inequalities  beginning  to  arise  between  communities  as  they  ‘shared’  responsibility  with
government  for  the  building  of  the  new  schools.Recognising  that  the  reforms  themselves
were ‘fundamentally imaginative, forward-thinking’ and were inspiringand enthusing many
teachers and educationalists, Scadding (1989:48) also wondered ‘if thegovernment has not
bitten off more than it can chew’.
Scepticism about the quality of the graduates from the restructured secondary school system
was  considerable.In  1993,  the  Senior  Secondary  School  Certificate  Examination  (SSSCE)
results among the first nationwide JSS cohort were lower than expected, triggering national
debate about the effectiveness and appropriateness of the new structure of education.There
was considerable confusion about the intended level of the SSSCE.
The Education Commission was clear that it should be pegged at O level since the old
A level was for the cream of the O level who enrolled in sixth forms. Theministry
said  that  the  SSSCE should  be  a  shade  above  O  level,  so  syllabuses  were  prepared
based on standard of examinations above O level (interview with author).
They  were  also  unhappy  about  the  school-based  continuous  assessment  which  contributed
40% of the total marks per subject. The universities expected about 20,000 students to qualify
with  a  minimum  aggregate  of  24.  In  the  event,  only 1,300  reached  this  level.  As  a  former
chairman of the Universities Entrance Examination Committee was to ponder, years later:
In  which  countrydoes  mass education reach such levels  with all the inadequacy of
books, science and mathematics teaching and a basic school system which is taught
by trained teachers who are university rejects ambition-wise and examination results
wise (interview with author).
The universities responded by insisting on setting their own entrance examinations.
Notwithstanding the quality of education and levels of achievement reached, the restructuring
of  the  pre-university system  nationwide  to  a  6+3+3  model  went  ahead  and  has  endured.  It
was probably the most radical reform component to have been implemented.
The second most radical component was the vocationalisation of the curriculum, especially at
the JSS level. It posed technical challenges. It was capital intensive, requiring equipment and
workshops unavailable everywhere. Since 12-15 subjects were to be studied in all it placed a
heavy  burden  on  the  curriculum  and  on  students.  The  requirement  that  practical  skills  in
technical  and  vocational  subjects  be  developed  across  the  country  in  an  objective  and
comparable  manner  proved  impossible  to  meet  and  the  Examinations  Council  resorted  to
using  written  items  to  assess  practical  work.  A  former  chairman  of  a  JSS  management
committee recalled:

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
18
In the whole of the CentralRegion (our children) were the best in terms of the exams
introduced under the reforms but they didn’t have a workshop. They could do well in
all these technical subjects and so on but they really didn’t have any workshop.They
were just memorising the things and passing (interview with author).
The  proposal  to  provide  one  workshop  per  JSS  contrasted  markedly  with  the  technical
training  centres  that  had  previously  served  a  number  of  middle  schools.  The  financial
requirements were considerable and did notattract support from the World Bank (see World
Bank, 2004:28).
6.4 Tensions between Technical and Political Imperatives
At a local level politicians were involved in implementation decisions through their role in
districtassemblies and in particular the education social services committee. Politicians were
also  involved  at  the  village  level  in  decisions  about  school  restructuring  and  in  ways  that
were sometimes in conflict with the technical plans of education managers. A former district
director  recalled  some  of  the  conflicts  with  politicians  and  religious  leaders,  and  the
compromises that had to be reached at village level:
The  total  enrolment  of  the  primary  school  was  96  but  for  political  reasons  the
assembly man wanted popularity and attempted toput in a six-classroom block... I
went  there  to  inspect  with  my team  to  see  the  facility before  we  gave  a  ruling and
there were a lot of local chiefs...they wanted schools ...even if the proximity of the
other school is less thanfivekilometresstill they wanted it.And it had implications
for resources.But of course when we saw that it was going to bring a lot of conflict
and issues, we sometimes acceded to some of these.You look at the situation on the
ground;  because  in  some  cases  they won’t  let  the  children  go  school...you  really
have to do a lot of consultation even at a friendly level (with the churches). You could
see a church here is very close and it has a Roman Catholic primary school, then there
is a Methodist primary school. But the (total) enrolment of these two together does
not even meet the criteria for one school.You need to talk to them, consult, and say
‘OK we’ll give you the primary school but they will pick the JSS’...So there were
political (aspects) under of all those things about access (interview with author).
Resistance of other kinds also arose at local level. Community labour was key to the success
of  the  JSS  school  building  programme.  The  government  provided  pavilion  structures  with
foundations,  walls  and  a  roof,  while  communitymembers  were  trained  to  complete  the
cladding  of  walls.  In  some  cases  those  opposed  to  the  military  government  persuaded
communities that the government was wrong to expect them to provide their labour and that
school buildings were entirely a government responsibility. Such influence discouraged some
communities from sharing the responsibility for the provision of school infrastructure.
Notwithstanding the difficulties faced in some communities, all those interviewed judged that
it  was  easier  to  implement  the  hardware  programmes  of  buildings  than  the  software
programmes of the curriculum and teacher education. A particular issue arose in relation to
the  rewriting  of  textbooks.  Traditionally  most  text  book  writers  had  been  contracted  from
among universityteachers. When the new texts needed to be written, theministry fell back,
not unexpectedly on traditional expertise-the same university teachers who had offered the
greatest source of resistance to the reforms.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
19
6.5 Formal Evaluations
Large-scale formalevaluations reinforce many of the points made above. Within two years of
the  1987  reforms  being  launched,  the  World  Bank  (1989)  undertook  an  early  formal
assessment, with a particular focus on the junior secondary stage and its likely effectiveness
on employment opportunities for young people. In part this early assessment was motivated
by a desire to make constructive input to the implementation stage which had been launched
quickly and  with  no  pilot.Implicitly it  provided  encouragement  to  the  governmentfor  the
reforms and endorsed their general ideology.
The  evaluation  reported  varying  levels  of  support  among  parents  for  the  reforms.  Strong
support was voiced by rural and small town craftsmen, though this was lower in the Central
and Western regions compared with the Eastern, Volta and Ashanti regions. Parents in the
Central  and  Western  regions  expressed  concerns  over  the  hurried  implementation  of  the
reforms and shortages of teachers to teach the practical and technical subjects. Least support
for  thereforms  was  reported  from  thenorth  where,  historically,  educational  provision  and
participation had been lower, where parents feared that teachers used education to proselytise,
and   where,   historically   education   had   been   completely   free.   These   problems   were
compounded  by  the  fact  that  household  incomes  were  heavily  dependent  on  subsistence
agriculture,  that  academic  timetables  were  insensitive  to  the  seasons  in  thenorth  and  the
opportunity  costs  of  education  were  therefore  likely  to  be  relatively  high.  The  evaluators
noted  that  while  the  long  school  vacation  had  been  changed  to  coincide  with  the  peak
planting  season  in  thesouth,  the  same  period  coincided  with  a  very low  demand  for  farm
labour in thenorth. The possibility of aligning the dates of schoolvacations in thenorth and
thesouth with their respective peaks of seasonal labour demand did not appear to have been
considered  and  to  this  day  remains  an  issue  (see  Hadley,  2009  for  a  fuller  discussion  of
seasonality).  Community  involvement  in  the  construction  of  school  buildings  and  JSS
workshops was reported to be high in many areas, though the evaluators noted that the wide
range of roles and responsibilities expected of communities extend beyond building.
The evaluation of the reforms to improve the quality of curriculum and assessment yielded
mixed results. While the JSS level textbooks were judged to be well-prepared and conveyed
messages consistent with the objectives of the reform.
The timetable still carries an anti-practical bias, with the practical work often being
concentrated at the end of the day or even outside the normal timetable. The lack of a
textbook  for  Ghanaian  languages  carries  the  hidden  message  that  these  are  less
important than English and other subjects. At the primary levelless attention has been
paid  to  avoiding  an  urban,  middle-class,  modern-sector  bias  in  the  textbooks...
Pedagogically there  are  too  many subjects  taught  in  any  one  year  at  the  JSS  level.
There  is  no  way  a  student  can  absorb  12  or  13  subjects  at  a  time  (World  Bank,
1989:20).
The system was judged to be both under-financed and over-financed. Teachers qualified to
teach  the  new  JSS  subjects  were  in  short  supply.  This  was  confirmed  some  years  later  by
Akyeampong  et  al  (2007:9)  who  concluded  that  the  implementation  of  the  technical  and
vocational aspects of the reform was compromised by the inadequate supply of well-trained
technical  and  vocational  instructors.  While  this  indicated  under-financing,  the  World  Bank
study  drew  attention  to  the  ‘overfinancing’  of  thesystem  caused  by  overstaffing  and  the
inefficient  use  of  resources  and  time.  In  many,  JSS  staff  had  been  appointed  in  excess  of

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
20
quotas. Duplication of facilities was noted in thesouth where schools belonging to different
church  denominations,  but  fundedalmost  entirely  by  government,  were  located  very close
together. Schooling hours were judged to be very low-23 official school hours per week in
JSS and 17.5 hours in primary. When teacher absenteeism, late starts to the day and unofficial
school closures are taken into account actual school hours were far fewer.
A subsequent World Bank evaluation (2004) reported that the textbook charges in primary
education  were  removed  in  1995.  Subsidies  for  boarding  and  feeding  in  secondary  and
tertiary  institutionswere  removed  through  an  increase  in  parental  contributions  and  the
subsequent  removal  of  the  parental  contribution.  The  proposal  to  remove  subsidies  for
university students ran into political difficulties owing to student protests and was delayed for
sometime before a loan scheme was introduced.
Teachers’ views on the reform were mixed. In 1991 an evaluation of teachers’ perceptions of
the reform was conducted by John Nyoagbe on behalf of the Ghana National Association of
Teachers  (GNAT).  This  evaluation  of  333  teachers  assessed  teacher  preparation  for  the
reforms  and  examined  how  the  reforms  affected  teacher  workload  in  terms  of  pre-lesson
preparation, lesson delivery, evaluation of learning outcomes and class-size. It also explored
teacher  involvementin  community  participation  and  teacher  views  on  the  policy  of  cost
sharing.
In general, teachers felt they had been consulted insufficiently prior to the implementation of
the reforms.When contrary views were expressed during the consultations that didtake place
these were felt to have been suppressed.
...the public fora organised in the wake of the reforms in 1987 did not offer them
enough opportunity to articulate their candid views as professionals and the live-wire
in  the  implementation  of  the  school  reforms.  Where  views  contrary  to  the  official
stance were expressed... these were not tolerated and in certain instances they were
considered subversive. A case in point was the timing and phasing of the reforms and
their  position  that  necessary  logistics  be  mobilised  up  front  before  implementation
took off (Nyoagbe, 1993:9).
Most teachers felt that their professional training had equipped them well to implement the
reforms  in  most  curriculum  areas.  The  exception  was  technical  and  vocational  education,
introduced in the JSS. A dearth of teachers was qualified to teach technical drawing and other
technical  and  vocational  skills.  Many  teachers  called  for  the  need  for  more  orientation
courses  to  specific  aspects  of  the  reforms.  In  an  interview  in  2009  Nyoagbe  recalled  the
teachers’  union’ssuggestion  for  a  phased  implementation  of  the  reforms  and  the  PNDC’s
resistance to this proposal
We  even  made  some  proposals  to  them  that  the  reforms  should  have  started  from
Primary 1.The thinking was that with each passing year, you phase in another grade
after you develop the curriculum and all that. But the government was suspicious of
that  arrangement...  So  when  the  Ghana  National  Association  of  Teachers  advised
that we should prepare, we should take things slowly andphase things gradually, the
PNDC  government  was  not  too  accommodating  of  that  request.And  in  order  to
ensure that the reforms went through they rather started from the junior high school
level.They  went  to  the  top  before  they  came  back  to  look  at  the  primary  school
curriculum.And  that  is  what  happened.And  then  hurriedly  teachers  ...were

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
21
orientated for a couple of weeks. It was a very rough take off and many teachers were
not happy.They didn’t  have the confidence  and  the mastery to handle many of the
newsubjects introduced in the curriculum (interview with author).
Teachers   commented   on   the   increased   workload   required   for   lesson   preparation   and
assessment of pupil work. Although the continuous assessment scheme had introduced new
forms  of  assessment  itconsumed  large  amounts  of  teacher  time  and  effort.  In  many  cases
class sizes had increased. At the time of the survey, 43% of teachers were managing class
sizes of between 41 and 60 pupils withfivepercentof teachers managing more than 60. The
charging of fees for the use of books was felt by many teachers to be deterring some pupils
from  attending  school.  The  non  availability  of  pupil  learning  materials  was  a  source  of
frustration for most teachers. Teacher views were divided on whether the increased level of
examination  fees  could  be  afforded  by  many  parents.  There  was  general  agreement  that
school involvement in co-curricular activities such as sports and games had been enhanced.
Teacher perceptions of community support for the reforms were also divided, reflecting in all
probability  the  variations  in  community  involvement  in  education  reforms.  Teachers  were
also divided on whether the reforms had improved the quality of teaching and learning and on
whether they had experienced greater fulfilment in teaching or not (Nyoagbe, 1993:13).
Financial resources ploughed into the 1986 reforms were considerable. The principal external
donor during the period 1986 to 1994 was the World Bank, initially through the Health and
Education  Rehabilitation  Project  (HERP)and  two  education  sector  adjustment  credits,
EdSACI   and   II.   These   were   followed   in   subsequent   years   by   the   Primary   School
Development (PSD) project and the Basic Education Sector Improvement Project (BESIP),
two   investment   projects   for   Community  SecondarySchool   Construction   and   Tertiary
Education and two projects for adult literacy (World Bank, 2004).
6.6 Political Will
Political scientists underline the strength of political will associated with the 1987 reforms.
Elsewhere,  I  have  offered  a  definitionof  political  will  as  a  sustained  commitment  of
politicians and administrators to invest the necessary resources to achieve specific objectives
and a willingness to make and implement policy despite opposition (Little, 2008). Addressing
the  question  of  political  will  and  reforms  in  primary education  Kosak  (2009:496)  suggests
that‘no government will provide primary education unless doing so helps the government to
stay in power’ and suggests two conditions under which support for primary education helps
thegovernment to stay in power. The first is where the political base of the government is the
rural poor, and the second is where employers need large numbers of workers qualified to the
primary school level.But the poor need a ‘political entrepreneur’ to help their claims. In the
Ghana  case,  especially  between  1986  and  1992,  the  interests  of  the  poor  were  served  by
General Rawlings’ PNDC revolutionary government, challenging the assertions of those that
suggest  that  investments  in  primary  education  are  bestserved  by  democratic  governments
(Kosak, 2009). Most evaluators of the 1987  reforms would agree that they were driven by
considerable high level political will. Inevitably, resistance arose from various quarters but it
was  dealt  with  firmly  and  was  muted.While  implementation  of  the  reforms  made  good
headway in the early years, overall progress was much slower than expected. Implementation
would gain new momentum in the 1990s.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
22
7. Sustaining Implementation of the 1987 Reforms in a New Democracy
1992 wasa watershed in Ghana’s political history and marked the beginning of a period of
sustained   political   stability   and   strengthening   democracy.   Military   governments   had
dominated for more than half the period since 1957. By the early 1990s pressures from within
the country and from external development partners led to the establishment of the National
Commission  for  Democracy.  The  commission  consulted  widely  and  recommended  the
election of an executive president, the formation of a national assembly, the creation of the
post ofprimeminister and the adoption of a new constitution. Among the many issues raised
were falling standards in education and the continued exclusion of many from education.
In power since 1981, Rawlings retired from the Army in 1992 andstood for election under
the newly named National Democratic Congress (NDC). The NDC won most of the seats in
the new assembly. The 1992 Constitution of theFourth Republic of Ghana came into effect
onthe 7
th
ofJanuary 1993. It marked a highly significant shift in the political environment in
which education policy would be formulated and implemented. More than that, it marked a
distinct shift in political legitimacy and the beginnings of a new democratic era.
The 1992 parliamentary and presidential elections were the first of five so far in the
new democratic era, including a peaceful handover of government from one political
party (the NDC) to another, the New Patriotic Party, (NPP) in 2008, and back again in
2008... this marks a shift in terms of political legitimacy. In the past, democratically
elected governments were at risk of being overthrown by the military... governments
have skilfully managed the leadership and incentives of the military so that it poses no
real threat to continued civilian rule (Pedley and Taylor, 2009:15).
Article 25 of the new constitution made basic education ‘free, compulsory and available to
all’. Article 38 (2) of the constitution required that the government:
shall within two years after Parliament first meets after thecoming into force of this
Constitution,  draw  up  a  programme  for  implementation  within  the  following  ten
years, for the provision of free, compulsory and universal basic education (Article 38
(2), the Constitution of the Fourth Republic of Ghana, 1992).
This  constitutional  duty  added  new  impetus  to  the  implementation  of  the  1987  reforms
through   the   Free,   Compulsory,   Universal   Basic   Education   programme   (fCUBE).   The
enshrinement  of  free  and  compulsory  basic  education  in  theconstitution  reinforced  more
strongly than before the principles of free primary education set out in 1951 and the free and
compulsory education  clauses  in  the  1961  act.  The  constitutional  mandate  gave  citizens  of
Ghana  the  legal  right  to  free  and  compulsory  education.  It  also  offered  legitimacy  to  the
civilian government. As a recently retiredchiefdirector of theministry explained:
fCUBE  was  started  in  1996  and  ended  in  2005.  It  was  driven  by  a  constitutional
mandate...successive governments cannot run away from this. It is somethingthat
has to be run to make sure there is access for all school children ...When these people
who came from a military government became  a  civilian government, there was an
issue  of  legitimacy  and  acceptability.Education  has  been  the  key  agenda  of  many
governments ... and was coming from a political angle (interview with author).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
23
The development of the fCUBE programme was spearheaded by theminister ofeducation.
Ad hoccommittees and sub committees were formed. Membership drew  from experienced
members  of  the  education  service,  the  universities  and  others.  The  main  objectives  of  the
programme were increasing access and participation, increasing the quality of education and
improving  management  efficiency.  Recalling  the  discourse  of  the  time,  a  formerdirector
general of theministry said:
they always added participation to access (to refer to the fact that) not only should the
people be in school but also the community’s involvement in this whole process. In
between this everyone was talking about gender and girls’ education. So in the access
and participation making sure that equal opportunities were given to girls and making
sure there was gender parity and so on (interview with author).
The  fCUBE  programme  was  published  in  1995  and  reflected  several  years  of  work  by
ministry personnel, education officers, citizen groups, donors and consultants. Described as a
strategic plan rather than a policy it sought to add momentum to the implementation of the
1986 reforms through five ‘strategic elements’ which in turn were intended to ‘redress four
major deficiencies in the present education system’ (GoG, 1995:4). These four (GoG, 1995:4-
5) were:
Access-must be expanded but especially for girls and citizens living in disadvantaged
areas and who, for social and economic reasons have not yet sufficiently partaken in
the educational process.
Efficiency-repetition and dropout rates must be reduced.
Quality-increase the pass rate for admission into secondary cycle institutions to 80%
by 2005. By the same year 75%of Basic stage pupils to meet minimum standards of
performance on national criterion referenced tests.
Relevancyof  basic  education  will  be  increased  through  quality improvement  in  the
curriculum  and  by  strengthening  community  participation  in  oversightof  local
schools.
The five strategic and integrated elements designed to remedy these four deficiencies were
infrastructuredevelopment,managementreform,curriculumchange,community
participation  and  improvement  of  quality  of  personnel  who  support  basic  education  at  all
levels. Technical sub-committees were established for each of these areas.
The  designers  of  fCUBE  undertook  to  make  education  decentralisation  a  reality  in  the
districts  through  the  Local  Government  Acts  of  1988  and  1993  (Act  462)  and  through  the
1995 Ghana Education Service Act. They reviewed and revised teaching material and syllabi,
introduced  additional  incentives  for  teachers  (through  housing  and  prizes),  and  proposed  a
shift  to  distance-based  in-service  teacher  training.  Accessand  participation  were  promoted
through  school  infrastructure  schemes  and  pilot  scholarship  schemes  to  increase  access
among  girls  in  primary  schools.  fCUBE  also  provided  a  framework  for  coordinated  donor
support to education.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
24
Consultation was conductedextensively with representatives of teachers and parent-teacher
associations, with churches, district directors of education, district assemblies and the West
African Examinations Council. Theminister was centrally involved, not least because:
he  realised  that  this  was  a  constitutional  issue  and  in  parliament  questions  were
always being asked as to how far this was going (interview with author).
While high level political will continued to have a positive impact on policy implementation
it continued toundermine the formal and mandated role of the bureaucrats in the GES.
In  our  structure  like  in  many  other  countries  there  is  a  separation  of  policy  from
implementation. Theministry focuses on policy ...and the Ghana Education Service
is  for  implementation.  The  criticism  I  had  (was  that)  it  did  not  allow  the  Ghana
Education Service who are really in touch with the schools and teachers to own the
programme.  They were  just  driven  to  do  this  and  that  ...  education  that  was  being
talked  about  and  being  pushed  but  the  motivations  were  mixed  (interview  with
author).
In recognition of the rushed preparation of teachers for the 1987 reforms, fCUBE proposed
more thorough schemes for teacher preparation and upgrading.
There  was  the  need  for  a  more  thorough  teacherpreparation  and  that  thorough
preparation  includes  not  only  feeding  them  with  the  necessary  content  and  the
pedagogical  skills  but  also  preparing  them  psychologically  to  own  the  fCUBE
process. So that was one aspect. Then the question of teacher motivationitself and a
whole   lot   of   things   go   into   motivation.   (There   are)   issues   about   continuous
professional education, about recognition for excellent performance, and about better
pay which will retain them in the existing profession (interview with author).
A  major  programme  of  teacher  education  and  the  upgrading  of  teachers’  qualifications
through distance education was spearheaded by the University College of Winneba. As if this
challenge  was  not  enough  in  itself  Winneba  became  a  university in  its  own  rightin  1994.
Winneba  would  face  technical  and  institutional  implementation  challenges  simultaneously.
The  technical  challenge  was  the  development  of  a  large-scale  teacher  education  system
though a new technology-distance learning. The institutional challenge was the creation of a
new university from six teacher training colleges. A formervicechancellor recalled four of
the  institutional  challenges  that  arose.  The  first  was  the  rivalry  among  the  staff  of  the  six
colleges. A second was the creation of new syllabi tailored to the work of training teachers. A
third was a shortage of accommodation to meet the various needs of technical, agriculture,
music  and  physical  education.  Finally  there  was  the  need  to  establish  a  university  and  a
university culture.
Weeven  had  a  re-designation  of  staff.We  were  moving  people  from  the  Ghana
Education Service culture into a university culture.Therefore  they are  coming with
different  designations  and  we  had  to  make  sure  that  these  designations  became
university designations (interview with author).
Under the Access and Participation Programme of fCUBE the government committed itself
to achieve gender parity in admissions to the first grade of primary school by 2000 and to
equalise  completion  at  sixth  and  seventh  grade  by2005.  In  view  of  the  historically  lower

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
25
levels of access, it committed to universalise access to Grade 1 in the North by 2000 and to
achieve a 93%completion rate at Grade 6 by 2005 (GoG, 1995:4).
We realised that in the northern parts of our country their participation in education
was very low.So apart from targeting girls, we also put special emphasis in the three
northern regions for people to go to school so that we can reach the level there.And
of course because of that, politicians from the north ...were really keen  on having
their children going to school, yes, we were very, very keen on that and they assisted
a lot of schools and of course the president, the head of state himself and his ministers
haverealised that look if we are to move our country forward then education requires
our party’s attention.And...if we are to fight ethnic problems in the country, it is
necessary  to  ensure  that  those  who  are  low  down  in  participation  in  education  are
brought  up,  for  national  stability,  national  progress  and  so  forth  (interview  with
author).
A more specific action plan for girls’ education aimed to increase girls’ enrolment inbasic
education,  reduce  their  dropout,  increase  transition  from  basic  education  to  the  senior
secondary  school,  and  expose  ‘ten  thousand  girls  in  pre-tertiary  education  to  science,
technology, mathematics education (STME)’ (Sutherland-Addy, 2001:75-76).
AGirls’  Education  Unit  was  set  up  in  1997  and  considerable  financial  investment  made,
largely by external agencies. The programme involved a range of activities from advocacy
and community sensitisation to scholarship schemes, formation of girls’ clubs, micro-credit
schemes  and  community  mobilisation.  In  2002  a  sobering  assessment  of  progress  in  girl’s
access  and  participation,  commissioned  by  UNICEF-Ghana,  concluded  that  the  rate  of
improvement was slower than expected.
The enrolment rate of  girls at primary level has  decreased by 0.5% over  the 4  year
period since 1998. The dropout rate at this level is stagnant while at the JSS level it is
1.1%. Transition from JSS 3 to SSS is also stagnant (33% to 32.8%). At the secondary
and  tertiary  level  it  seems  that  policies  and  programmes  specifically  addressing
questions of gender equity have stimulated a response in the target population. There
is evidence of improved performance. ...Despite these indicative improvements, low
enrolment and transitions at basic level give a general view of stagnation (Sutherland-
Addy, 2002:67-68).
The strong political will for education reform that was evident in the 1980s continued through
the  1990s  with  the  push  from  policy  formulation  into  policy  implementation.  The  donor
community was very active in its support both for fCUBE and for policy-relevant research.
Indeed some have gone so far to suggest that the funding of policy research in Africa through
the  1980s  and  1990s  became  so  donor-dominated  and  led  by  researchers  external  to  the
country that local needs and views were suppressed (e.g. Samoff et al, 1996). An evaluation
of  34  policy  studies  and  views  of  policymakers,  policy  implementers,  researchers  and
initiator  organisations  by  a  team  of  Ghanaian  researchers  confirmed  that  the  research  was
funded  disproportionately  by  development  partners.  However,  a  majority  of  studies  were
conducted  by Ghanaianresearchers  and  the  development  partners  were  judged  not  to  have
‘interfered’ with the process and outcomes of the studies (Agyeman, Baku and Gbadamosi,
2000).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
26
The implementation challenges posed by fCUBE for the supply and training of teachers were
similar to those faced in the wake of the 1987 reforms. The supply of untrained teachers and
of trained teachers struggled to keep pace with increases in enrolment. The student-teacher
ratio in primary declined from 32:1 in 1996/7 to 35:1 in 2005/6, while it was more or less
constant at 18:1at the junior secondary level. The student to trained-teacher ratio in primary
declined  from  43:1  to  63:1,  and  in  junior  secondary  they  rose  from  23:1  to  26:1  (figures
rounded). Pass rates in the BECE examination sat at theend of the junior secondary stage
increased only very slightly from 60.4% in 1998 to 62.2% in 2008 (Akyeampong, 2009).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
27
8. Parallel Policies and Plans, 2000-2008
The target date for the provision of free and compulsory basic education for all children was
2005.  Elections  in  2000  heralded  a  regime  change.  While  the  left-of-centre  National
Democratic  Congress  was  replaced  by  the  right-of-centre  National  Patriotic  Party,  the
commitment to fCUBE was maintained. The Ministry of Education led an EducationSector
Review which fed into a long term plan for education, the Education Strategic Plan (ESP),
2003-2015.  Developed  largely  by  professional  educational  planners,  well  aware  of  the
discourse on basic education circulating among members of the international community, the
ESP  was  framed  in  the  language  of  Education  for  All  and  the  Millennium  Development
Goals.
It  provided  the  fully-costed  basis  for  annual  operational  plans,  for  Ghana’s  bid  for
additional resources under the EFA Fast Track Initiative (FTI), and for sector budget
support  from  donors  particularly  DFID  and  the  World  Bank  (Pedley  and  Taylor,
2009:19).
In  parallel  with  this  Ministry-led  policy  and  planning  process,  thepresident  established  a
separate  30-member  committee,  working  under  the  chairmanship  of  Professor  Anamuah-
Mensah.  The  committee  undertook  widespread  consultations  through  visits  to  institutions,
districts  and  regions,  phone-in  radio  programmes,  press  briefings  and  submissions  of
memoranda. In 2002,Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty First Centurywas presented to
the Office of the President and thecabinet. It reported GERs of 38.7% at pre-school, 82.3% at
primary,  63.3%  at  thejuniorsecondary  stage  and  17%  atseniorsecondary  stage.  The
committee  identified  the  ‘major  defects’in  the  current  structure  of  education  as  exclusion
from  pre-school  education,  and  over-emphasis  of  a  ‘grammar/general  type  of  education’,
inadequate attention to technical and vocational education and the limited opportunities for
transfer between streams.It recommended a new structure of basic education: two years of
kindergarten, six years of primary and three years of JSS. Beyond JSS there would be three
parallel  streams,  each  of  three  years  duration,  namely  senior  secondary  schools,  technical
institutesandvocational institutes along with a programme of apprenticeships.
To   increase   access   and   participation   in   basic   education,   the   authors   of   the   report
recommended thatdistrictassemblies and traditional authorities should embark on enrolment
drives.They recommended a relaxation of the insistence by some principals of the wearing of
school uniforms in kindergarten and lower primary, especially in deprived areas where school
uniforms represent a significant cost to the household. They also recommendedthatdistrict
assemblies  should  supply  more  facilities  and  equipment,  and  that  MoESS  anddistrict
assemblies should persuade Koranic schools to adopt the national curriculum.
The government’s assessment of this reportled to the publication of awhitepaper in 2004
and  the  commitment  on  paper  at  least  to  additional  reforms  not  included  in  theministry’s
long term Education Strategic Plan. A capitation grant scheme was also introduced in 2005 as
part  of  the  larger  process  educational  decentralisation.  Itspurpose  was  to  support  primary
schools  and  reduce  their  need  to  charge  any  type  of  fee.  Its  initial  impact  on  increasing
enrolments was marked but has not been sustained (Akyeampong, 2009:182, Thompson and
Casely-Hayford, 2008:1).
During  the  period  from  2000  to  2008,  parallel  machineries  for  policy  formulation  were  in
place. On the one hand theministry had created the Education Strategic Plan for the period

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
28
2003-2015.On   the   other   the   President’s   Review   Committee   had   made   a   series   of
recommendations,  manyof  which  had  been  translated  into  awhitepaper.  The  donor
community  appears  to  have  perceived  the  production  of  thewhitepaper  as  indicating  a
weakening of  the  commitment  to  the  Education  Strategic  Plan  with  its  overriding  goals  of
universal  primary  education  (Pedley  and  Taylor,  2009)  and  a  commitment  to  reforms  that
were unsustainable financially (MoESS, 2008).
Five  years  elapsed  before  some  of  the  recommendations  in  the  2002  President’sReview
Committee had been implemented.
there  was  a  lot  of  disagreement  at  cabinet  and  it  took  some  time  before  the
government issued thewhitepaper on it. It was unfortunate that thewhitepaper was
issued sometime in 2004 which was just at the end of the first term of thegovernment
then it (finally) took off justone year before the end of the second term of the (same)
government (interview with author).
One reason for the delay was the frequent change ofminister. A senior official in theministry
recalled how in seven years he had worked with fiveministers. This stands in direct contrast
with the 1986 reforms  when the seniorministerial team endured for  many years. Effective
political leadership does not emerge whenministers can expect to be changing their job after
15 months. When thewhitepaper was issued theministry established the National Education
Reform  Implementation  Committee.  Although  theminister  was  formally  the  chair,  in  the
minister’s absence the meetings were generally chaired by theministry’schiefdirector or a
representative of the tertiarysector. The committee comprised professionals from the private
sector, industry employers, from tertiary education and from basic education.In contrast with
the 1986 reforms when the GES was substantially by-passed, this time a deliberate attempt
was madeto involve the GES.
...learning from the 86/87 reforms, where theministry was accused of high-jacking
the whole reform, I made sure that thedirectorgeneral of the GES who is head of the
implementing wing, was part of it. I sat in the chair with him infront there every time.
Sometime last year we handed over the implementation reports to them for them at
the implementation level to look at it and study and have their own way of working
out what has been recommended (interview with author).
By the timethe new reforms were introduced in 2007 some of the original recommendations
made in the 2002 report had been changed. Most controversially, secondary education was
extended  from  three  to  four  years.  Less  controversially  JSS  and  SSS  schools  were  to  be
renamed as Junior High Schools (JHS) and Senior High Schools (SHS) respectively.
Reflecting on  the  NPPs proposed  change  of  senior  secondary schooling  from  three  to  four
years one policy-maker who had been very involved in the 1986 and 1992 reforms said:
We actually never finished (the 87 reforms) and one would have expected that it will
be fine tuned to do the evaluations and then step back and correct and move forward,
not  change  just  because  you  didn’t  like  the  thing.Like  what  the  last  government
(NPP)did,  they  changed  it  tofouryears...for  absolutely  no  reason,  no  scientific
logic.Because   the   very   committee   they   put   together   to   look   and   make
recommendations did not recommend that. They said ‘look thethreeyears is good,

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
29
there is a lesson’... What isthe cost of that to the nation, to students, to parents?It
doesn’t make sense (interview with author).
By 2008, the NPP had been in power for eight years, compared with the nineteen preceding
years of the military PNDC and the civilian NDC. While the NPPis generally perceived as
the pro-private sector party of the middle classes, with a stronger emphasis on the quality of
education,  the  PNDC  period  is  seen  as  the  one  in  which  the  greatest  improvements  in  the
expansion  of  enrolment  were  achieved.  The  rateof  change  in  education  enrolment  in
secondary  education,  compared  with  the  growth  in  population,  would,  arguably,  not  have
been  so  great  had  it  not  been  for  the  determination  of  Rawlings’  military  government.  If
change  had  depended  on  a  voting  electorate,no  government  would  have  been  courageous
enough to take some of the steps on access that Rawlings did.Indeed some have viewed the
NPP’s emphasis on quality:
as a way for the elite to come to have their agenda.You find more private institutions
set upduring the NPP government.Right from primary to university we have more
private  universities  than  public  universities.  There  is  always  this  tension  (interview
with author).
Another observer claimed that although educational access was on the NPP’s agenda, they
did  not  address  seriously  the  question  of  equitable  access.  The  introduction  of  a  school
feeding programme offers a case in point.
They deprived communities that really needed this support. For example, the school
feeding programme was supposedto increase access in the deprived communities.So
why  do  you  have  the  school  feeding  programme  in  Kumasi  and  Accra  and  the
deprived communities are not having the service. This is the political leadership.They
brought  in  that  in.  If  you  want  to  get  thesupport  of  the  voting  community–the
communities that vote for you, they were predominantly in Kumasi and Accra.If the
feeding programmes are done there, next time they will vote for you (interview with
author).
Another spoke of the enduring tensions between the political and the technical imperatives of
reform.
Politicians set the broad political parameters or the guidelines...Then some of the
bad things–it looks like sometimes when issues of curriculum come up, they are not
referred to curriculum specialists.The politicians make the decisions. For example the
issue about religious and moral education, I thought it was terrible for people to walk
to thepresident and ask thepresident to make a curriculum decision. Because yes he
is  the  most  powerfulbut  I  don’t  think  he  is  a  curriculum  specialist.  Of  course  he
didn’t make the decision directly but by merely referring the thing and telling ‘take
another look at it’ the message was clear.He said you cannot go against thepresident
(interview with author).
At   the   same   time,   politicians’   sensitivity  to   the   voting  public   can   be   beneficial   for
implementation, especially in relation to the provision of infrastructure.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
30
The general public judge politicians.So the politicians are more sensitive about those
things that the voting public judge them on like ‘do we have schools that have roofs,
children have furniture to sit on and are the teachers there?’ (Interview with author).
The power of the political over the technical dimensions in policy formulationand planning,
as distinct from implementation, appears to have strengthened during the period 2000-2008.
The gatekeepers who controlled access to policy formulation were the President himself and
those approved by him.
All  key  appointments  are  personally  approved  by  thepresident.  This  included
membership of the 2002 President’s Committee on Review of Educational Reforms.
The result seems to be that, to a great extent, this committee acted as a filter of policy
ideas on education (Pedley and Taylor, 2009:25).
Although  theministry  carried  the  formal  mandate  for  education  policy  formulation,  the
agenda  of  thepresident’scommittee  appeared  to  enjoy  greater  influence  than  the  agenda
embedded within the ESP. In turn this suggests thatpresidential associates and advisers ‘had
more  influence  than  officials,  consultants,  and  donor  agency  staff  working  in  or  with  the
Ministry of Education’ (Pedley and Taylor, 2009:25).This position may reflect the views of
donors largely. Ghanaian commentators suggested thatwith the exception of the donors there
was a high degree of overlap in the membership ofpresident’scommittee and the group that
produced the ESP (interview with the author). What all are agreed on is that the President’s
Committee had a broader remit forall sectors of education-primary, secondary and tertiary-
while the ESP focussed more on basic education.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
31
9. The International Dimension of Educational Policy
International ideas and practices in education influence domestic policy formulation inmany
ways.Inter aliathese include the influence of the donor assistance community, of ideas and
practices  borrowed  and  lentthrough  conferences,  professional  associations,  networks  and
journals,  of  foreign  consultants,  advisers  and  delegates  and  of  accountability  systems
associated with so-called global standards (Little, 2008). Here we focus on two main types of
influence–the   donor   assistance   community   and   Ghana’s   engagement   with   World
Conferences on Education.
9.1 The Donor Assistance Community
Thedonor assistance community offers both finance for policy reform, a discourse about the
content of policy reform and a discourse about ways of organising the finance for reform. All
three are considered here.
9.1.1Finance
Following  full  independence  in1957  Ghana’s  education  system  was  financed  largely  by
domestic resources. During the 1980s the World Bank became a major provider of additional
resources for education. These resources were part and parcel of theWorldBank’s broader
support  for  the  Economic  Recovery  Programme.  As  noted  earlier,analytical  and  planning
work  and  essential  school  materials  were  provided  from  1984.  These  were  followed  by
substantial  education  sector  credits  between  1986-91  and  1990-94.  Subsequent  projects
included a CommunitySecondary SchoolConstructionProject (1991-1995), the Literacy and
Functional  SkillsProject  (1991-1995),  Tertiary  EducationInitiative  (1992-1998),  Primary
School  DevelopmentProject  (PSD,  1993-1998),  the  Basic  Education  Sector  Improvement
Project (BESIP, 1996-2002), Vocational Skills andInformalSectorProject (1995-2001) and
a National Functional Literacy Programme(1999-2004). Between 1986 and 2002 the Bank
disbursed  $269  million.  This  money  has  been  spent  on  many  inputs,  including  35  million
textbooks and 8,000 school pavilions (World Bank, 2004).
The World Bank’s own assessment of its impact on education policies and outputs over the
period 1989-2004 is positive. In contrast to Heyneman’s (2003:315) claim that ‘local policy
makers  have  become  passive  recipient’s  of  theWorldBank’s  agendas’,  the  Operations
Evaluation  Department  of  theWorldBank  presents  a  different  view  of  its  operations  in
Ghana  in  the  1980s.  It  argued  that  theWorldBank  did  not  push  a  particular  education
agenda.  Rather  it  supported  a  reform  process  that  was  owned  by  the  PNDC  Military
Government and rooted in a domestic reform agenda stretching back to the early 1970s. From
this perspective theWorldBank saw itself as a catalyst and funder of the 1987 reforms, rather
than driver (World Bank, 2004). While this is theWorldBank’s own assessment, some have
suggested that donors expressed their demands by linking the provision of finance to reform
implementation. Donors  bought reforms  as part  of a structural  adjustment package (Pedley
and Taylor, 2009:13). Still others, on the Ghanaian side, have suggested that the World Bank
was co-opted by Rawlings, and did not seek out or listen to the views of other stakeholder
groups, including the Ghana Education Service (Interview withauthor).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
32
9.1.2 Discourse
A key member of Rawlings’ government recalled the relationship with theWorldBank in the
lead  up  to  the  1987  reforms  and  the  negotiations  between  the  Ghanaian  government,  the
WorldBank  education  sector  staff  and  theWorldBank’s  macro  finance  staff.It  illustrates
well the discussion and the language that surrounded the negotiation of a financial loan and is
worth quoting at length.
it was at a time when they (the World Bank) believed in conditionalities...So what
they would do would be to say ‘ok, what do you want to achieve and let’s cost it, let’s
look at how long it will take, what it would take to do it, do the whole staffing ...all
of that thing’.And then they would say ‘well, we can’t do it because we can’t afford
it.And besides you should concentrate on one area’.So they tried very hard to use
the funds to get us to fit into their conception of what an educational reform should
look like for a country at the stage that we were at.So we spent a lot of time debating
and arguing our way through these things and then you had the macro people dealing
with the Ministry of Finance and so on and they would say you can’t spend more than
an X amount.And so there was that debate as well.The sector people and the macro
people  in  the  Bank  I  don’t  think  they  have  coffee  together  or  anything.This  was
completely mind-boggling ...different worlds.But they did try to look at issues of
efficiency and so on.But we think by and large we did make some progress in saying
-‘look we can’tsee a situation where you are dealing with primary education where
are the teachers going to come from and so on’.So we got to work on upper levels of
education as well and it was hard. Especially in the area of higher education they felt
that we couldn’t afford to do certain things like set up a teachers’ university and we
thought that if you have 120,000 people in an industry, they’ve got to have an outlet.
They’ve got to have a place where they can improve themselves and we thought the
overall effect on the sector would be many, many times what was invested in it and so
on.So  we  tried  to  rationalize  our  diploma  colleges  and  get  them  together,  to  put
together a university college for teachers (interview with author).
The  pro-active  role  of  government  and  the  critical  stance  towards  aid  and  conditions  was
echoed by several who played key roles in Rawlings’ government.
And the economic  recovery programme affected  education...we needed  money to
promote education.So that initiative came from the government, not from the World
Bank  ...and  they  gave  the  advice  that  you  have  to  plan  and  get  money  for  the
education sector at that time(interview with author).
It was not easy... we accepted conditions in so far as it did not move us too far away
from our objective.To start with the US government... refused to do anything.They
refused   absolutely   refused...We   really   got   pissed   off   by  the   United   States
Government attitude.But eventually they turned around towards the end.They were
very, very critical because itlooked so good and they couldn’t be left out (interview
with author).
Speaking   particularly   about   the   higher   education   reforms,   a   former   deputy   secretary
recollected  the  tensions  between  the  PNDC  rhetoric,  theWorldBank’s  rhetoric  and  the
demands of various constituencies.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
33
Part of the difficulty was thatwehad gone to the World Bank to go and get funding.
And so there was a stigma around the efforts that were being made... This (reform)
was  driven  from  within  (but)  there  was  this  feeling  that  it  was  theBank  that  was
making us do these things and asking for efficiency and asking for this and that and
the other...we had to work on the rhetoric, so it did not sound so much as if it was
the   Bank...That   made   it   quite   difficult   sometimes   to   work   with   certain
constituencies  like  the  teachers’  unions,  the  university  unions,  the  vice  chancellors
and so on (interview with author).
TheWorldBank played three main roles in support of the reforms. The first was financial
support, especially for teacher training, textbooks, learning materials and school building and
rehabilitation.The   second   was   the   provision   of   technical   assistance   for   studies   that
contributed   to   planning,   policy   and   implementation.   Thirdly,itwas   instrumental   in
mobilising support for the programme from other donors.
But negotiation and policy dialogue is, in principle at least, a two-way process. TheWorld
Bank did not support every aspect of the 1987 reform and had to concede some ground. As
described earlier, it resisted strongly the vocationalisation of the junior secondary curriculum
but  accepted  it  in  return  for  agreement  that  it  should  support  the  education  sector  more
generally. Secondlyitdid not wish to support the government’s proposed rate of expansion of
secondary  education   and   triedwithout   success   to   find   another   donor   to   support   the
Community Secondary Schools Project. Having failed to do so, it supported the project itself.
Thirdly,it‘quickly accepted the government’s view that it was politic to bring in a subsidised
loan schemeat tertiary level once feeding subsidies were eliminated’ (World Bank, 2004:28).
9.1.3 TheSector Wide Approach (SWAp)
In 1987 theWorldBank led an important meeting of donors to education in Ghana in Vienna.
Recognising the  suspicion  with  which  it  wasperceived  by some  in  the  international  donor
community at that time, theWorldBank’s assessment of its role included the comment that
‘it  probably helped  that  the  meeting was  jointly sponsored  by UNICEF,  since  donors  may
have resisted being directed solely by the Bank’ (World Bank, 2004:31). The donors agreed
to contribute to a common programme of support to education. Donor support for the 1987
reforms had the character of a sector-wideapproach(SWAp):
a  decade  before  the  term  came  into  usage  and  theBank  can  claim  some  credit  for
achieving this degree of donor coordination(World Bank, 2004:31).
As more donors became involved in education in Ghana, so the competition between them
grew, especially between the World Bank, USAID and ODA/DFID. By the early 1990s, the
new NDC government was developing fCUBE. A sizeable budget was prepared, from which
theWorldBank was planning to commit about one fifth of the required finance. Although the
ministry  was  formally  in  charge  of  the  planning,  theWorldBank  saw  fit  to  remind  the
minister ofeducation of the importance of the ‘government being seen to be firmly in charge’
and to suggest that theminister invite other donors to a meeting to mobilise their support for
the new fCUBE programme. While other donors had little or no experience in education in
the mid 1980s and were willing to follow theWorldBank’s lead, this would not be the case
nine   years   later   (World   Bank,   2004:32).   DFID   and   USAID   were   beginning   to   act
independently of  theWorldBank.  For  examplethe  Overseas  Development  Administration
(subsequently DFID) invited a high level team from the Ghanaian Ministryof Educationto

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
34
London.  The purpose of  the meeting was the  development of  an education sector strategy,
despite the fact that a strategy had been developed already. No other donors were invited to
the London meeting. From this time onward first DFID and then USAID went their own way
with programmes to finance basic education (interview with author).
A  former  senior  civil  servant  in  the  GES  recalled  that  during  this  period  there  was
considerable disagreement and some argument with donors, particularly with USAID.
SWAps were not accepted by USAID as a funding mechanism initially although they
are  now  changing somewhat.The  World  Bank  is  also  slightly more  sympathetic  to
country driven priorities (interview with author).
But by the late 1990s the donor community as a whole was not working through the modality
of  a  SWAp.  The  fragmentation  of  funds  led  to  similar  projects  being  managed  through
separate silos and separate relations with government. As the number of donors increased so
did the fragmentation of their efforts.
The increasednumber of donorsand the corresponding increase in the number of their
activities, outside the central government’s framework for the reforms, raised fears of
duplication  of  efforts  and  the  likelihood  of  these  donors  operating  at  variance  with
government’s priorities in the sector. For example, while the Saudi Fund focused on
secondary education, the Norwegian government preferred non-formal education, the
OPEC  Fund  concentrated  on  basic  schools  in  the  three  Northern  Regions,  with  the
African Development Bank concentrating on the tertiary sector. Each donor adopted
its own method of operations (Thompson and Casely-Hayford, 2008:16).
Tensions between the bilateral donors and theWorldBank grew. The insistence of most of
the bi-lateral donors on  an exclusive focus onbasiceducation was  at odds with theWorld
Bank who wished to support tertiary education as an extension ofbasiceducation, a tension
which led some to claim that theWorldBank was a ‘traitor to the Education for All agenda’
(Thompson and Caseley-Hayford, 2008:16)
While potential for a SWAp with strong donor coordination was weakened from this point
on,  the  flow  of  funds  increased,  with  major  contributions  from  USAID  and  DFID  in
particular. A formeracting-director of fCUBE recalled the considerable volume of resources
from external sources:
ODA  (DFID)  assisted  in  providing  materials  and  so  on,  especially  for  the  new
curriculum in JSS around vocational and technical subjects.Resource allocation was
intended  to  be  sufficient  to  provide  text  books  for  every  pupil.A  lot  of  donor
resources were available and were largely sufficient for the 1996 action programme
(interview with author).
Throughout the 1990s the power of the donor community to influence  educational policies
and  action  plans  remained  strong.  But  this  did  not  mean  that  government  officials  were
steam-rollered into spending money on what thedonors wanted. As two government officials
reflected together:
It has always been a struggle balancing with what the donors want and what we want.
And we have always argued with them and we used to have ... a consultative panel

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
35
meeting once every month.Wemet with all the donor agencies briefed them on what
was going on and they would give their thoughts on the way–because they do their
monitoring as well.And sometimes they disagree with some of the things we want to
do.We try to convince them.When they are able to persuade us of some of the things
and  the  merit  in  them  and  we  see  merit  in  them,  we  take  them.But  sometimes  we
have to argue with them strongly (interview with author)
The  inevitable  strain  placed  on  the  ability of  theministry to  deal  with  the  separate  project
management  structures  resulted  some  years  later  in  a  merged  Project  Management  Unit
within theministry.
By the 2000s the power of the donors had weakened considerably. With onlyten% of total
public expenditure coming from external sources, the donor community was of the view that
it  enjoyed  less  policy  influence  and  leverage  compared  with  the  1980s  and  1990s.  The
strategy of ‘strong conditionality’ could no longer be employed (Pedley and Taylor, 2009:24-
25). From the perspectiveof the Ghanaian government the donor community had lost some
influence because it has not wished to support some of the nonbasiceducation programmes
that the government has wished to promote. Reflecting on a conversation with the outgoing
minister ofeducation in 2008, a Ghanaian consultant commented:
one thing theminister said was you know we never realised just how much expensive
this (recent) reform was going to be and realised that we didn’t have the money to do
it.But when we looked at the fCUBEwe saw that it was only possible because it had
a  lot  of  financial  backing  from  the  donors...The  NPP  government  started  talking
about reforms, by talking about higher education, talking about secondary. But then
the  money  wasn’t  there.So  they  were  stuck  with  the  reforms.  They  couldn’t
implement  because  there  was  no  financial  support  from  the  donors(interview  with
author).
At  the  same  time  the  general  policy  environment  within  which  policies  in  all  sectors,
including education, are formulated, had changed. With a change in the political legitimacy
of government after 1992, but especially after 2000, the rules of the political game had also
changed.  Influence  had  become  more  indirect  and  informal  and  many  more  groups  had  a
political  voice,  including  those  of  the  media,  trade  unions,  those  inparliament  and  civil
society groups. This changed policy environment changed the way that donors have needed
to work in-country. No longer could donors cannot rely on government alone to drive through
reforms  (Pedley  andTaylor,  2009).  Ghanaian  commentators  agree  that  the  influence  of
donors on national policy agenda is waning and changing its nature. While in earlier regimes
the views of the  political leadership on the  agenda in which donors  could participate  were
reasonably clear and donor representatives knew with whom they could and should negotiate
in  theministry,  the  space  in  which  donors  can  act  and  negotiate  appears  to  have  become
ambiguous (interview with author).
9.2 World Conferences
Even if financial aid fromthe donor community and direct influence through the discourse of
negotiation have diminished, the education policy-making community in Ghana is now more
engaged  with  the  international  community  through  international  conferences  and  meetings
than it was three decades ago. Post-colonial policy discourses in education have continued to
be influenced by discourses from beyond Ghana’s shores. As importantly, Ghana’s practices

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
36
and discourses in education have influenced discourses beyond Ghana’s shores, and notonly
in the West Africa region.
Ghana’s 1987 reforms were influential in the discussions and texts at the World Conference
on Education for All, held in Jomtien in 1990. A former deputy secretary of education had
played a key role in Jomtien as one of two chief rapporteurs. In the interview transcript below
she  describes  her  role,  her  perception  of  some  of  the  tensions  in  that  work  and  the
contribution she was able to make, representing both Ghana and developing countries more
generally.  She  recalls  howdelegates  from  developing  countries  with  poorly  developed
education  systems  wanted  more  clarification  about  the  meaning,  ambitions  and  targets  for
basic  education  while  delegates  from  European  countries  wanted  to  define  basic  education
rather broadly.
Alot of the developing nations wanted more clarification especially on the whole idea
of  achieving  this  within  a  decade  and  so  on.That  was  difficult.And  I  think  the
Europeans had difficulty with how relevant this is to them and could they define basic
education more broadly and so on.So that kind of wording–form of words to convey
how you can make basic education, you can customise the concept whichever angle
you were coming from, that’s really something and I think the final declaration did
manage to satisfy people to some extent as far as that was concerned.I think that was
the most major thing (interview with author)
Ghana had much to offer the discourse at Jomtien. Ghana’s 1987 reforms in basic education
were ‘ahead of the curve. We had not even gone to Jomtien when we were talking about basic
education’ (interview with author).
In turn, the emerging international EFA discourse was employed in the Ghanaian debate and
is  apparent  in  the  policy  texts  produced  between  1992  and  1996  when  fCUBE  emerged.
Asked whether the Jomtien discourse had entered the policy discourse in Ghana and to what
extent there were two parallel discourses, a former Acting Director General of fCUBE and a
former Deputy Secretary of Education commented:
Jomtien was influentialin that there was a dovetailing of policy documents (interview
with author).
Ghana in particular was very good at adapting the sort of multi-national or global...
conceptions of where to go, the direction.They would sort of incorporate it into the
policydirection.For example the idea of basic education–we used to have primary
school and so on.But we adopted basic education.In fact in a way Ghana was ahead
of the curve because by the time we talked about basic education we hadn’t even gone
to Jomtienyet (interview with author).
The  report  of  the  President’s  Review  Committee  published  in  2002  referred  to  Ghana’s
commitment to Education for All (EFA) and recognised the use of innovative approaches to
improvetheGER. These included the mainstreaming of shepherd and Koranic schools and
the  use  of  distance  education  and  ICT,  including  radio  and  television  (GoG,  2004).  The
language of the Millennium DevelopmentGoalsdeclared at the Millennium Summit in 2000
is also apparent in several subsequent policy texts. The Education Sector Performance Report
of 2008 produced by the Ministry of Education, Science and Sports (MoESS) reports that the
Education Strategic Plan (ESP) for the period 2003-2015 was informed by ‘key documents,

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
37
such  as  GPRS1  and  2,Educationfor  All  (EFA)  and  the  Millennium  Development  Goals’
(MoESS,  2008:10).  It  goes  on  to  indicate  the  influence  of  a  range  of  other  international
frameworks for development cooperation on decisions about targets and policies, including
the Education for All Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI).

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
38
10. The Present and the Future
Elections  in  December  2008  placed  educational  policy  under  the  spotlight  once  more.  All
parties contesting the elections produced manifestos on education. The incumbent party-the
National Patriotic Party (NPP)-asserted that ‘education is the key to the development of our
nation and a healthy democracy (and) a public good’ (NPP, 2008:46). They claimed that they
would:
work  hard  towards  a  new  Ghana  where  all  children  have  an  equal  and  unfettered
chance   at   gaining   access   to   quality   education   regardless   of   their   economic
circumstances or what part of the country they live or come from.(NPP, 2008:46).
Inter aliathe NPP committed to a programme designed to promote both access and quality
including commitments to:
Guarantee  access  for  all  children  of  school-going  age  to  free  quality  education
currently  available  at  the  basic  school  level.  This  will  be  extended  to  cover  Senior
High School level as well
Improve school supervision
Make available adequate teaching and learning materials
Establish  ‘league  tables’  for  schools  in  each  district/region  to  spur  competition  and
raise academic standards and performance, with rewards going to dedicated teachers
and head teachers
Refocus   teaching   from   remembering  facts   and   figures   to   stimulating  thinking,
creativity, analysis and problem-solving(NPP, 2008).
In  its  manifesto,  the  National  Democratic  Congress  (NDC)  acknowledged  the  work  of  the
Anamuah-Mensah  Committee  during  the  time  of  the  NPP  government  (2001-2009)  and
deplored ‘the cycle of reforms the (education) sector undergoes each time there is a change of
government, making the sector unpredictable and dysfunctional’ (NDC, 2008:67). The NDC
promised to convene an all-party conference on  EducationReform, to review the technical
options available and to strive to reach a consensus. All parties would be invited to sign an
‘Education Pact’, committing the country to an educational reform package for the next 25
years. Major reforms within this periodcould only be made by a similarly reconvened all-
partyeducationconference (NDC, 2008:67)
The  NDC’s  manifesto  committed  itself  to  a  longer  list  of  promises  than  that  of  the  NPP.
These are detailed below along with comments on the progress made in relation to each in the
period between the 2008 election and the time of writing (July 2010).
Providing  a  coordinating  mechanism  to  enable  pre-school  education  to  become  a
component of the fCUBE program as a cure for the present chaotic situation whereby
the  Ministry  of  Education,  the  Department  of  Social  Welfare,  District  Assemblies,
NGOs and individuals are allinvolved in pre-school education.
This   commitment   follows   developments   in   pre-school   education   begun   by  the
previous   government.While   co-ordinatingmechanisms   have   not   been   fully
established, pre-schooling has become compulsory and is being integrated into basic
school  provision  so  that  pre-schools  are  being  attached  to  existing  basic  schools.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
39
Some 11,000 basic schools have pre-school facilities attached at the time of writing.
In 2010, 200 new pre-schools were scheduled to be built.
Establishing a pre-school training college in each of the ten regions.
Currently   seven   colleges   are   implementing   early-childhood   training   and   the
University  of  Education,  Winneba  is  organising  both  pre-service  and  in-service
training for early-childhood education with support from UNICEF.There is not yet a
pre-school training college in every region in Ghana, however.
Within basic education abolish fees for sports and cultural activities. Provide school
uniforms for children in public schools in deprived communities and reduce walking
distances of children by establishing basic schools in all under-served communities.
These  fees  have  been  abolished  and  the  provisionof  free  uniforms  has  begun.
Political issues surrounding the selection of ‘deprived communities’ based on rather
dated definitions has meant that a longer list of deprived communities has been used
for  this  purpose  and  also  that  free  uniforms  have  been  provided  to  some  ‘non-
deprived’ communities in addition.The establishment of basic-schools in all under-
served communities has yet to be completed.
Ensure that each constituency has a minimum of oneseniorhighschool.
This has not been achieved and hasbeen complicated by changes to the number and
size of constituencies and districts.
Revamp  the  science  resource  centres  and  restore  vacation  science  and  technology
workshops for girls.
This process has begun including by means of the renovation of resource centres and
the  training and  mobilisation  of  technicians.The  task  has  been  decentralised  to  the
regions  (via  the  regional  co-ordinating  directors)  and  is  no  longer  a  national  focus.
Moreover, the focus is no longer on girls only and will include provision for boys.
Modernise and  expand technical schools and provide for  alternative  well-developed
streams of technical education.
Provision  in  relation  to  this  commitment  remains  largely  in  the  planning  stage.
COTVET (Council  for  Technical  and  Vocational Education  and Training)  has been
established  and  is  mandated  to  establish  apprenticeship  programmes.It  is  also
mandated to develop technical school provision.The pursuit of this commitment may
depend on the availability of funds although developmentis being supported by JICA
among other donors.
Improve  the  general  conditions  of  teachers  through  the  payment  of  competitive
salaries, provision of decent accommodation and enhanced retirement benefits.
Negotiations continue in relation to this area.A15%increase in salaries  across the
board has been approved and programmes supported by donors to improve conditions
(especially teachers’  accommodation)  in  deprived  areas  are  in  operation.Support  is

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
40
also being received in deprived areas from the World Bank.Allowances for teachers
and other state employees in deprived areas are being reviewed and pensions are also
under  review  in  consultation  with  unions.At  the  present  moment,  however,  these
changes are unrealised.
Pay certificated teachers a professional allowance.
This ‘professional allowance’ is said to be reflected in the agreed15%salary increase.
This  is  an  across  the  board  increase,  however,  so  is  not  specifically a  ‘professional
allowance’.
Pay hardship allowance to teachers in identifieddeprived areas.
These allowances have not yet been agreed or paid but are under review along with
allowances for other government workers.
Provide access and support to teachers for training and professional development.
Following a process begun bythe previous government, a nationalINSETpolicy is
now  in  place.This  is  a  school-based  programme  and  structures  for  operation  are
already in place.The ministry is supporting INSET distance programmes as part of
the  national  policy  provided  by  the  University  of  Education,  Winneba  and  the
University of Cape Coast.School-based INSET programmes are decentralised to the
district level.
Streamline and strengthen the operational and delivery capacity of the school feeding
programme and expand the programmeto cover all primary schools.
This  is  being  developed  and  new  schools  are  being  added  to  the  school-feeding
programme,  although  it  is  far  from  covering  all  basic  schools.Expansion  is  very
gradual and is sensitive to political issues at the local levelaround the definition of
deprivation and need.
Review  the  capitation  grant  policy and  expand  infrastructure  to  cope  with  expected
surges in enrolments resulting from the policy review.
The level of the capitation grant has been increased from3 to 4.5GhanaCedis(US$
2.44 to 2.79).The policy itself has not yet been reviewed.Provision for infrastructure
development has been made in the budget, including for the construction of new pre-
schools and other basic schools, with support from donors including DFID and JICA.
Computer  literacy  and  basic  typing  skills  will  become  part  of  the  basic  education
system(NDC, 2008).
While computer literacy and typing skills are already part of the  ICT curriculum in
basic schools, implementation of this provision is hindered by major problems of ICT
infrastructure including the provision of computers and the connection of schools to
the electricity grid.Progress on this commitment is likely to take considerable time
and  investment.Planned  examinations  in  ICT  couldnot  be  implemented  owing  to
inadequate infrastructure.Progress will depend heavily on the availability of funding.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
41
The  introduction  of  a  ‘School  Report  Card’  system  will  aid  the  identification  of
infrastructural   deficiencies   and   is   being   supported   by   USAID.Nonetheless,
movement in concrete terms on this pledge has been very limited.
Revert the duration of the four yearseniorhighschool to three.
This controversial plan resonates with that of the predecessor NDC, in power between
1992 and 2000. Somehave argued that:
the  objective  for  the  extension  of  the  duration  of  thefouryear  SHS  was  to
enable  the  majority  of  students  who  are  products  of  the  under-funded  and
poorly taught public basic education system to benefit more from second cycle
education (Djangmah, 2009).
While students who have been taught well in private fee paying primary and junior
secondary schools perform well in thefouryear SHS and are expected to continue to
perform well in thethreeyear SHS, it is suggested that the poorestwho access low
quality basic  education  would  benefit  greatly from  a  fourth  year  in  SHS  (Interview
with author).
This pledge has not been achieved as yet, and a final decision requires a decision in
parliament.Parliament  approved  the  document  submittedproposing  the  change  in
July 2010 and infrastructural provisions for the move back to three years of SHS are
in preparation.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
42
11. Conclusions
This  monograph  has  explored  five  questions  in  relation  to  the  politics  of,  policies  for  and
progress in basiceducation. These were:
What progress has there been in access to basic education over the past 30 years?
What policies for access to basic education have been promoted?
What  role  have  political  regimes  played  in  the  formulation  of  policies  on  access  to
basic education?
What role has political will played in the process of policy formulation?
What have been the drivers and inhibitors of the implementation of reforms in basic
education since 1987?
11.1 Progress in Basic Education
We saw in Table 1 that the greatest strides in enrolment in recent  years in basic education
occurred between 1991 and 1998. This progress has appeared to level off in recent years and
appears  to  have  reversed  for  the  children  in  the  poorest  quintile.In  partial  explanation,
Akyeampong (2009) suggests that children in the lowest poverty quintile are more likely to
enrol children in primaryGrade 1 late and that the mean age-grade ‘delay’ is greatest in the
Northern, Upper West and Upper East regions. This, combined with greater levels of relative
poverty, and perhaps, the increasing opportunity costs of child labour, may have conspired to
demotivate households from investing in education.
While   Sutherland-Addy   (2002)   focussed   on   the   four   year   period   1998-2002,   and
Akyeampong  (2009)  and  Rolleston  (2009)  focussed  on  the  period  1991-2006,  the  World
Bank’s  2004  evaluation  purports to assess the  impact of  efforts over the 15  years  between
1989 and 2004. It points to increasing school attendance (enrolment) rates among children of
primary and  junior  secondary school  age  and  a  levelling  off  of  enrolment  in  secondary.  It
records the virtual elimination of the gap between male and female enrolment, except in the
northern regions. In contrast to the analyses of Akyeampong (2009) and Rolleston (2009), the
World Bank (2004) claim that primary enrolment hasrisen more sharply among the poor than
the non-poor. In part this must reflect the boundaries drawn by each evaluator between poor
and  non-poor,  the  particular  years  selected  for  comparison  as  well  as  the  data  sources
employed.  There  are  significant  discrepancies  between  administrative  and  survey  data  and
between the GLSS, DHS, CWIQ and MICS surveys.These are partly due to definitions. The
primaryNERamong  the  poor  may  have  improvedmore  dramatically  as  a  result  of  more
children enrolling in lower grades.What does seem clear however is that up to 2006 there
was no significant improvement in completion, and that the higher up the system a child is
the more poverty appears to disadvantagethem, most likely because of the increasing costs to
be met by households (Rolleston, personal communication).
11.2 Policies for Basic Education
Policies for the expansion of access to basic education in Ghana have been advanced since
the beginning ofthe 20
th
century, starting with Governor Guggisberg’s 16 guiding principles

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
43
for the development of education. These included equal opportunities for boys and girls and
co-education at certain stages, the use of vernaculars as media of instruction in the earliest
stages  of  education,  curricula  relevant  to  the  economy  and  high  quality  teachers.  These
themes would recur several times and in the run up to independence the colonial government
set out atenyear development plan for universal enrolment of children in primary education
by 1970.
Nkrumah’s  Accelerated  Development  Plan  (ADP)  of  1951  was  even  more  radical  and
promoted both supply and demand-led strategies. Fees for primary education were removed,
large  numbers  of  new  teachers  recruited  and  trained  and  schools  expanded.  A  revised
structure  of  education  was  proposed  and  introduced  gradually.  After  full  independence  in
1957 and the introduction of the Education Act of 1961 tuition fees for middle school were
also removed. Scholarships for primary, secondary and tertiary education were introduced to
increase the demand for education from students in thenorthern regionsand Brong-Ahafo.
Up to this point the policy emphasis was on increasing access through enrolment.
After  1966,  policies  for  basic  education–and  in  education  more  generally–focussed  on
standards and the quality of education experienced by children once they had enrolled. This
included  a  focus  on  the  content  of  curriculum  relevant  to  the  world  of  work  in  the  post
primary grades and a proposal that children be selected for the academic stream of secondary
after two years in middle school. Those not selected would follow a further two years in ‘pre-
vocational’ classes prior to leaving school.This policy was perceived by many as elitist and
pamdering  to  the  needs  of  the  middle  classes  and  by 1972  the  pendulum  had  swung  back
from standards and quality to access. By this time large numbers of children from the poorer
households  had  gained  access  to  primary  education  and  their  aspirations  now  were  for
improved access to secondary, especially to the academic rather than the vocational stream of
secondary. Policies to create a basic education stage, common to all children, and covering
primary and the first three years of secondary (junior secondary) were promoted as part of the
New  Structure  and  Content  of  Education  (NSCE)  in  1974.  The  NSCE  also  recommended
changes in the curriculum that would make the experience of primary and junior secondary
education more practical and skills-oriented.
In  essence  the  NSCE  proposals  became  the  blueprint  for  the  1987  and  the  1996  reforms
which  emphasised  increases  in  enrolments  in  basic  education  as  well  as  changes  in  the
content and relevance of the curriculum.To increase the demand for education among girls,
scholarship  schemes  were  piloted.  Teachers  were  given  incentives  in  addition  to  salary
through housing, prizes for teaching and training schemes.
By the mid 1990s the focus of attention had reverted to the question of standards when the
performance of the first junior secondary school cohort of students was lower than expected.
Inter alia,this would lead to an extension of the senior secondary stage in 2007, from three
years to four, to make up for the lower than expected performance of students in thejunior
secondary stage.
While  much  of  the  policy  discourse  in  the  1970s  about  inequalities  in  education  focussed
around  the  transition  from  primary to  junior  secondary,  the  focus  now  is  on  the  transition
from junior secondary to senior secondary. In 2002policies for the introduction of a fee-free
twoyear pre-school and a diversified, three-stream, secondary school were recommended. To
increase demand for schooling among the poorest recommendations were made to relax the
insistence on the wearing of school uniforms among pre-school and lower primary children

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
44
and  a  school  capitation  grant  introduced  to  reduce  the  need  for  primary  schools  to  raise
revenues from households.
During the run up to the parliamentary elections in December 2008 both the right ofcentre
NPP and the left of centre NDC promised increases in access and quality at all levels.The
NPP stressed quality and standards at all levels rather more than the NDC who emphasised
expansion  of  pre-school  education  and  teacher  training,  an  expansionof  technical  schools,
while at the same time proposing a reduction for thesenior secondary stage from four years
to three.
11.3 Political Regimes and Education Policies
Political regimes both before and after the establishment of a stable democracy haveplayed
an important role in the direction of education policiesas have external priorities and issues
of  resource  availability.  Populist  regimes,  both  democratic  and  military,  have  both  pushed
education  reform  hard  and  mainly  in  the  direction  of  increased  opportunities  for  the  rural
poor. This has been so during the early post independence years of Nkrumah’s Convention
People’s Party (1951-1966) years through the military regimes of the National Redemption
Council  (1972-1979)  and  the  Provisional  NationalDefence  Council  (1981-1992)  and  on
through the democratic National Democratic Congress (1992-2000). While not backtracking
on access, regimes owing their power base to the urban middle classes have tended to stress
the  importance  of  improving  quality  and  maintaining  and  improving  standards.  Both  the
military regime of Ankrah (1966-1969) and the elected Progress Party (1969-1972) wished to
see the rate of expansion contained with a greater focus on quality and standards.
It  would  be  almost  thirty  years  before  a  right  of  centre  regime  would  reappear,  after  the
democratic   elections   of   2000.   The   right   of   centre   National   Patriotic   Party   remained
committed to fCUBE, created a long-term plan for education (2003-2015) and introduced a
capitation  grant  scheme  to  remove  the  need  for  schools  to  charge  any  type  of  fee.  It  also
promoted  the  private  sector,  promoted  diversification  of  the  senior  secondary  stage  of
education and education decentralisation and management, a move which some feared was
contributing to increasing, rather than reducing, disparities between schools in the quality of
public basic education on offer (Akyeampong et al, 2007). Annex 1 provides a summary of
the links between political regimes and education policies over the period 1951-2008.
11.4 Political Will
Political will can be defined as a sustained commitment of politicians and administrators to
invest the necessary resources to achieve specific objectives and a willingness to make and
implement  policy  despite  opposition.  The  formulation  and  implementation  of  the  1987
reforms  offer  a  clear  illustration  of  an  education  reform  driven  from  the  highest  political
authority  and  a  mobilisation  of  financial  and  human  resources  to  support  implementation.
Some of the politicians were themselves drawn fromamong practising educationists and led
not only the formulation of plans but also their implementation. The military regime brooked
no opposition and reduced the powers of those who opposed aspects of the implementation,
in particular that of the bureaucrats in the Ghana Education Service.
11.5 Drivers and Inhibitors of Reform Implementation
In sectiononeit was suggested that both the 1987 and 1996 education reforms were attempts
to implement policies that had been formulated in 1974. The 1974 policieson restructuring

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
45
the education system and changing the content of education had run into myriad obstacles.
These included a lack of finance in a declining economy, and considerable resistance from
the  middle  classes  as  well  as  the  middle  class  bureaucratsrunning  the  education  system.
There were shortages of trained teachers, educational equipment and other learning materials.
Overall there was little political will to push the reforms forward in the face of opposition and
extremely limited resources.
From  1987  the  pattern  of  drivers  for  and  inhibitors  of  reform  would  change.  Through  the
1980s  there  was  a  very  strong  political  will  and  agenda  for  change.  The  institutional
framework  for  change  was  strengthened  through  the  creation  of  a  National  Education
Commission and a Ministryof Educationand committees peopled with experts in education.
Planning and implementation were pushed simultaneously, awareness programmes mounted
anddistrictassemblieswereinvolved  in  implementation  of  the  large  scale  infrastructure
programme. Significant financial resources for the reforms were made available by the World
Bank.Resistance to the reforms was similar in some respects to that experienced post 1974.
The education bureaucrats were not enthusiastic implementers andthe middle classes resisted
passively.   The   revolutionary   government   dealt   with   resistance,   through,inter   alia,
restructuring theministry and the  GES  and by directing the  army to  deliver textbooks and
other  logistics.The  implementation  process  was  stymied  technically  because  the  reforms
were  not  piloted  and  teachers  insufficiently  oriented  and  trained  in  the  more  radical
curriculum  content  and  pedagogy,  including  assessment  and  some  shortages  of  equipment.
Parental  support  for  the  reforms  was  variable  across  the  regions  and  some  plans  were
insensitive to the different agricultural seasons in thenorth and thesouth of the country. In
some  areas  local  politicians  worked  alongside  local  communities  to  undermine  some  of
components of the building programme.
The  1996  fCUBE  programme  benefited  from  constitutional  change.  Article  38  (2)  of  the
constitution  required  that  the  government  develop  a  plan  for  implementation  within  the
following  ten  years,  for  the  provision  of  free,  compulsory  and  universal  basic  education.
These gave legal force to the provision of basic education across the country. The political
will  that  had  driven  the  1987  reforms  remained  and  finance  from  the  international  donor
community  continued  to  flow.  This  time  teachers  were  better  preparedfor  the  reforms
through extensive upgrading programmes. Research began to be used more readily to inform
the  work  of  policy  makers  and  implementers.  Education  decentralisation  became  a  reality
through legal fiat. The technical challenges faced in the development of large scale distance
education programmes  for teachers  were  great  and the supply of  untrained teachers  and of
trained teachers struggled to keep pace with increases in school enrolments.
The  drive  for  universal  access  to  basic  education  remains  strong  even  today.  The  tensions
between  increases  in  enrolments  and  improvements  in  the  quality  of  learning  also  remain.
The supply of trained teachers struggles to keep a pace with the numbers of children enrolled,
and, as more and more  children complete primary and junior secondary education the  goal
posts of what constitutes education for all will shift. So too will the ideological preferences of
political parties in a democratic system.  In its 2008 election manifesto the victorious NDC
promised to convene an  all-partyconference oneducationreform, to reach a consensus on
education reform for the next 25 years (NDC, 2008:67). To date that conference has not been
convened.

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
46
References
Addae-Mensah,   I.,   J.   Djangmah,   and   C.   Agbenyega,   (1973)FamilyBackgroundand
Educational Opportunity in Ghana. Accra: Ghana Universities Press
Afrifa, A. A. (1966)The Ghana Coup. London:Cass
Agyeman,  D.,  R.  Baku  and  R.  Gbadamosi  (2000)Review  of  Education  Sector  Analysis  in
Ghana 1987-1998. Paris:UNESCO for Working Group on Education Sector Analysis
Akyeampong, K.(2009) Revisiting Free Compulsory Universal Basic Education (FCUBE) in
Ghana.Comparative Education45 (2), pp.175-195
Akyeampong,  K.,  J.  Djangmah,A.  Seidu,  A.  Oduro,  and  F.  Hunt  (2007)Access  to  Basic
Education  in  Ghana:  The  Evidence  and  the  Issues.CREATE  Country  Analytic
Report. Sussex:CREATE
Colclough, C., K. Lewin and C. Chiswick (1993)Educating all the Children: Strategies for
Primary Schooling in the South.Oxford:Clarendon Press
Djangmah,J.  (2009)  Senior  High  School–Four  Years  for  Majority  and  Three  Years  for
Minority. Mimeo
Foster,  P.  (1963)Secondary  Schooling  and  Social  Mobility  in  a  West  African  Nation.
Sociology of Education37, pp.150-171
Foster, P. (1965)Education and Social Change in Ghana. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Government  of  Ghana  (GoG)  (1995)Programme  for  the  Development  of  Basic  Education
within the Framework of free Compulsory Basic Education (fCUBE).Accra:Ministry
of Education.
Government  of  Ghana.  (2002)Meeting  the  Challenges  of  Education  in  the  Twenty  First
Century.  Report  of  the  President's  Committee  on  Reviews  of  Education  Reforms  in
Ghana.Ministry of Education. Accra: Adwinsa Publications (Gh) Ltd.
Graham,  C.  (1971)The  History  of  Education  in  Ghana  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the
Declaration of independence.London:Cass
Hadley, S. (2010) Seasonality and Access to Education:The Case of Primary Education in
sub-Saharan Africa. CREATEPathways to AccessMonograph 31.Sussex:CREATE
Heyneman,  S.  (2003)  The  History and  Problems  in  the  Making of  Education  Policy at  the
World  Bank:  1960-2000International  Journal  of  Education  Development23,  pp.
315-337.
Kosak (2009) Realizing Education for All: Defining and Using the Political Will to Investin
Primary Education.Comparative Education45(4), pp.495-523

Access to BasicEducation in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
47
Lewin, K.M. (2007)ImprovingAccess,EquityandTransitionsinEducation:Creatinga
ResearchAgenda,CREATE Pathways to Access Monograph 1. Sussex: CREATE
Little,  A.W.(2008)  EFA  Politics,  Policies  and  Progress.CREATEPathways  to  Access
Monograph 13.London/Sussex:CREATE
Ministry of  Education  Science  and  Sports  (MoESS)  (2008)Education  Sector  Performance
Report 2008, Accra:MoESS
National  Democratic  Congress  (2008)A  Better  Ghana:  Investing  in  People,  Jobs  and  the
Economy.NDC Manifesto. Accra:NDC
National  Education  Forum  (1999)Towards  Sustaining  an  Effective  National  Education
System.Accra:Ministry of Education
New  Patriotic  Party  (2008)Moving  Ghana  Forward:  Building  a  Modern  Ghana.  NPP
Manifesto. Accra:NPP
Nyoagbe (1993)The Impact of the Education Reforms on Teacher Job Performance at Basic
Education Level.Accra:Ghana National Teachers’ Secretariat.
Pedley and Taylor (2009)Politics and Policy in Education in Ghana.Paper presented at the
UKFIET Conference on Politics, Policies and Progress, Sept13-15 2009.
Republic of Ghana (1992)Constitution of the Fourth Republic of Ghana.Accra
Rolleston (2009) Human Capital, Education and Exclusion:The Case of Ghana 1991-2006.
CREATEPathways to AccessMonograph 22.London/Sussex:CREATE
Scadding,  H.  (1989)  Junior  Secondary  Schools-An  Educational  Initiative  in  Ghana.
Compare19(1), pp43-48
Sutherland-Addy, E. (2002)Impact Assesment Study ofthe Girl’s Education Programme in
Ghana.Accra:UNICEF-Ghana
Thompson and Casely-Hayford (2008) The Financing and Outcomes of Education in Ghana.
RECOUP Working Paper No. 16. Oxford:RECOUP
World Bank (1989)Basic Education for Self-Employment and RuralDevelopment in Ghana.
Washington DC:World Bank Population and Human Resource Department
World  Bank  (2004)Books,  Buildings,  and  Learning  Outcomes:  An  Impact  Evaluation  of
World   Bank   Support   to   Education   in   Ghana.   Washington   DC:   World   Bank,
Operations Evaluation Department (OED)

48

49
Annex 1 Political Regimes and Education Policy Texts, by year, 1951-2008
YearPolitical RegimePolitical
Head
Regime
orientation
and power
base
Significant
Education Policy
Texts
Policy themes
1951Transition from
colonialpower
elections (under
universal suffrage)
for Legislative
Assembly won by
the Convention
People’s Party
(CPP)
NkrumahNationalist,
Populist
1951 Accelerated
Development Plan for
Education
Expansion of
primaryeducation
1957Convention
People’s Party
(CPP)
NkrumahLeft,
Populist,
Rural base
1961 The Education
Act (Act 87)
Expansion of
primaryeducation
1966
Military
Coup
National Liberation
Council (NLC)
AnkrahThe Kwapong
Committee Report
Contain expansion
of primary
education; focus on
quality.Selection to
academic and
vocational streams
after two years of
middle school
1969
Elections
Progress Party (PP)BusiaRight1971 committee on
education reform
Common and
extended basic
education.
1972
Military
Coup
National
Redemption
Council
Acheampong1974 The Dzobo
Report: the New
Structure and Content
of Education
1974 The Ghana
Education Service
Decree
Common and
extended basic
education cycle of6
years primary and 3
years junior
secondary. Removal
of middle schools
from the structure of
education
1979
Military
Coup
Armed Forces
Revolutionary
Council (AFRC)
RawlingsLeft,
Populist,
Rural
1981
Elections
Social Democratic
People’s National
Party (PNP)
LimannSocial
Democratic
1981
Military
Coup
Provisional
National Defence
Council (PNDC)
RawlingsLeft,
Populist,
Rural
1983 The PNDC Law
42
1987 The 1987
Education Reforms
1988 The PNDC Law
207
1988 University
Rationalisation
Committee (URC)
Report
1991 Government
Increase access to
common and
extended basic
education. Reduce
pre-university span
from 17 to 12 years
in a 6+3+3 system.
Literacy in the
vernacular, a second
Ghanaian language
and English,
technical and
vocational
education,
restructured teacher

Access to Basic Education in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
50
White Paper on the
URC report
education,
introduction of
continuous
assessment
1992
Elections
National
Democratic
Congress (NDC)
RawlingsLeft,
Populist,
Rural
The Constitution of
1992, the Fourth
Republic
The NCTE Act (Act
454)
1994 Education
Reforms Review
Committee Report
1994 Programme for
the Provision of Free,
Compulsory and
Universal Education
(fCUBE) by the Year
2005
1995 the Ghana
Education Service
Act (Act 506)
1995 Programme for
the Development of
Basic Education
within the Framework
of Free Compulsory
Universal Basic
education (fCUBE)
by the year 2005
Continued
implementation of
the 1987 reforms
2000
Elections
National People’s
Party (NPP)
KufourRight, Middle
classes
2002 President’s
Education Review
Committee (the
Anamuah-Mensah
Committee)
2003 Launch of the
Education Strategic
Plan 2003-2015
2004 Report of the
President’s Review
Committee
2005 Review of
fCUBE
2006 White paper on
the Report of the
President’s Education
Review
Committee
2007 National
Education Reform
Implementation
Continued
implementation of
the 1987/1992
reforms
Pre-schools
Diversification of
senior secondary
Capitation grants to
schools

Access to Basic Education in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
51
Committee
2008 Education Act
2008
Elections
National
Democratic
Congress (NDC)
Atta MillsLeft, Rural,
Populist

52
Report summary:
This  monograph  examines  the  history and  politics  of  educational  reform  inGhana.  Using data  from
interviews   conducted   with   senior   policy-makers,implementers   and   researchers,   as   well   as
documentary sources, toexplorethe drivers and inhibitors of change at the political, bureaucratic and
grass-roots  levels.  The  monograph  explores  the  nature  of  the  domesticpolitical  and  administrative
machinery which has enabled comparativesuccess in enrolment growth in Ghana, attending also to
the importance ofpolitical will as well as to shifting patterns of international and donorinfluence.
Author notes:
Professor  Angela  Little  isProfessor  of  Education  and  International  Development  at  the  Institute  of
Education and CREATE Convenor for the Institute. Angela’s research interests include, globalisation,
education  and  development;  qualifications  and  livelihoods;  Education  for  All  (EFA)  policy  and
planning; Multi-grade teaching; Access and transitions in education.
Address for Correspondence:
CREATE, Centre for International Education,
Department of Education, School of Education & Social Work
Essex House, University of Sussex, Falmer, BN1 9QQ, UK.
Website:   http://www.create-rpc.org,
Email:create@sussex.ac.uk

Access to Basic Education in Ghana: politics, policies and progress
53