

 
 
1 
 
 
BIOLOGY 
PREAMBLE 
This is an examination syllabus drawn up from the curricula of the member countries of 
the  West  African  Examinations  Council.  It  should  be  used  alongside  the  appropriate 
teaching syllabus(es) of the country where the candidates are domiciled. 
This examination syllabus is divided into three sections: Sections A, B and C. Section A 
is  for  all  candidates,  Section  B  is  for  candidates in  Ghana  only  and  Section  C  is  for 
candidates in Nigeria, Sierra Leone The Gambia and Liberia. 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
This syllabus is designed to assess candidates’ 
1  .        understanding  of  the  structure  and  functions  of  living  organisms  as  well  as 
appreciation of nature; 
2. acquisition  of  adequate  laboratory  and  field  skills  in  order  to  carry  out  and 
evaluate experiments and projects in Biology; 
3. acquisition  of  necessary  scientific  skills  for  example  observing,  classifying 
and interpreting biological data; 
4. acquisition  of  the  basic  relevant  knowledge  in  Biology  needed  for  future 
advanced studies in biological sciences; 
5.  acquisition of scientific attitudes for problem solving; 
6. ability to apply biological principles in everyday life in matters that affect 
personal, social, environmental, community health and economic problems; 
 
 7. awareness  of  the  existence  of  interrelationships  between  biology  and  other 
scientific disciplines. 
SCHEME OF EXAMINATION  
 
There will be three papers: Papers 1, 2 and 3, all of which must be taken.  Papers 1 and 2 
will be a composite paper to be taken at one sitting. 
 
PAPER 1:  Will consist of fifty multiple-choice objective questions drawn 
from Section A of the syllabus (the section of the syllabus which is 
common to all countries). It will carry 50 marks and last for 50 
minutes. 

 
 
2 
 
PAPER 2:  Will consist of six essay questions drawn from the entire syllabus. 
The paper will be put into three sections, Sections A, B and C.  
Section A: Will consist of four questions drawn from Section A of 
the syllabus. 
  Section B: Will be for candidates in Ghana only and will be drawn 
from Section B of the syllabus (ie the section of the syllabus 
perculiar to Ghana). It will consist of short-structured questions. 
  
              Section C: Will be for candidates in Nigeria, Sierra Leone, The 
Gambia and Liberia and will be drawn from Section C of the 
syllabus (ie the section of the syllabus containing material for those 
countries only).  It will also consist of short-structured questions. 
Candidates will be expected to answer two questions from Section 
A and all the short-structured questions from either Section B or 
Section C.  
Each question in Section A will carry 20 marks while the 
compulsory short-structured questions in Sections B and C will 
carry 30 marks. The total score will be 70 marks.  The paper shall 
take 1 hour 40 minutes. 
PAPER 3:     Will be a practical test (for school candidates) or a test of practical 
work (for private candidates) lasting 2 hours and consisting of three 
sections: Sections A, B and C. 
  Section A: This will consist of two compulsory questions drawn 
from Section A of the syllabus, each carrying 25 marks. 
 Section B: This will be for candidates in Ghana only. It will 
consist of one question drawn from Section B of the syllabus and 
will carry 30 marks. 
 Section C: This will be for candidates in Nigeria, Sierra Leone, 
The Gambia and Liberia. It will consist of one question drawn 
from Section C of the syllabus and will carry 30 marks. 
Candidates will be expected to answer all the questions in Section 
A and one question in either Section B or C.  The paper will carry a 
total score of 80 marks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3 
 
DETAILED SYLLABUS 
SECTION A  
(For all candidates) 
 
CONTENTS NOTES  
 
A. Concept of Living  
 1.    Classification 
(a) Living and non-living things 
 
 
 
(b) Classification of living 
things into Kingdoms: 
Monera, Protoctista (Protista), 
Fungi, Plantae, Animalia. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Classification of objects into living and non-
living, giving examples of each group. 
Viruses should be mentioned as a link 
between living and non living things. 
 
Kingdom Monera (Prokaryotes), single-
celled, motile or non-motile organisms 
without definite nucleus e.g. bacteria and 
blue-green algae. 
 
Major characteristics of the major phyla of 
Kingdoms Protoctista and Fungi. 
 
Kingdom Protista (Eukaryotes), single-celled, 
motile or non-motile organisms. Cell 
structure complex with definite nucleus e.g. 
Chlamydomonas, Amoeba. 
Major phyla of Kingdom Protoctista include: 
Rhizopoda, Zoomastigina, Apicomplexa, 
Ciliophora, Euglenophyta, Oomycota, 
Chlorophyta, Rhodophyta and Phaeophyta. 
 
Kingdom Fungi (Eukaryotes), mainly non-
motile organisms composed of hyphae 
containing nuclei e.g. moulds, mushrooms 
and Rhizopus.  
Major phyla of Kingdom Fungi include: 
Zygomycota, Ascomycota and 
Basidiomycota. 
 
Kingdom Plantae (Eukaryotes), mainly 
multicellular non-motile organisms which 
contain chlorophyll that enable them to 
photosynthesize e.g. mosses, ferns, pines, oil 
palms and yam plants. 
Characteristics of the major divisions and 
classes: Bryophyta (Hepaticae, Musci), 
Lycopodophyta, Filicinophyta, 
Coniferophyta, Cycadophyta and 
Angiospermophyta  (Monocotyledoneae and 

 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(c)   Differences between plants and       
animals. 
 
2.     Organization of life 
(a)    Levels of organization 
(i)   cell (single-celled organisms): 
     Amoeba, Euglena, Paramecium 
 
(ii) Tissue: Hydra 
 
 
 
 
(iii)    Organ (storage 
organ) bulb, rhizome and heart. 
 
(iv)    System/Organ System: In     
mammals, flowering plants - 
reproductive system, excretory system 
etc. 
 
(b)    Complexity of organization 
in higher organisms: 
advantages and 
disadvantages. 
 
 
   3.     Forms in which living cells exist: 
(a) Single and free-living: 
Amoeba, Paramecium, 
Euglena, and 
Chlamydomonas 
Dicotyledoneae). 
 
Kingdom Animalia (Eukaryotes), 
multicellular motile organisms that feed on 
other organisms e.g. corals, worms, insects, 
snails, fishes, frogs, snakes, monkeys cows. 
Characteristics of the major phyla and classes 
of Kingdom Animalia. 
The external features of the following 
organisms should be mentioned: cockroach, 
butterfly, Tilapia, toad/frog, lizard, domestic 
fowl/pigeon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The examples should be used to illustrate 
differentiation and specialization in 
organisms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The significance of different levels of 
organization including volume/surface area 
ratio should be mentioned. 
 
 
 
The structure of these organisms in relation to 
the forms of existence should be studied to 
illustrate dependence and interdependence. 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
 
(b) Colony: Volvox 
(c) Filament: Spirogyra 
(d) Part of a living organism: 
Cheek cells, onion root tip 
cells and epidermis of fleshy 
leaves. 
    
4.   (a)    Cell structure and functions of cell   
   components. 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 (b)  Similarities  and  differences  between 
      plant and animal cells. 
5.     The Cell and its environment: Physical and 
Biophysical processes. 
(a) diffusion 
(b) osmosis 
(c) active transport 
 
 
6.     Properties and functions of the living cell 
    
(a)   Nutrition 
 
(i)    Autotrophic 
(photosynthesis) 
 
(ii)  Heterotrophic (holozoic) 
 
 
(b)    Cellular respiration 
 
Definition and processes of: 
 
(i)  aerobic respiration  
(ii) anaerobic respiration  
(iii) energy release 
 
 
 
 
 
Distinguish groups of cells that form tissues 
from those that form colonies or filaments. 
 
 
 
Cell structure should include: Cell wall, cell 
membrane, nucleus, cytoplasm, cytoplasmic 
organelles: mitochondria, lysosomes, 
chloroplasts, endoplasmic reticulum, 
ribosomes, centrosomes, Golgi bodies, 
chromosomes. The function performed by 
organelles should be known. 
 
 
 
 
The significance of these processes should be 
mentioned as factors that affect cell activities 
in its environment. 
 
Haemolysis, plasmolysis, turgidity and 
crenation should be mentioned. 
 
 
These should be mentioned as processes 
occurring within living cells. 
 
 
Nutrition in Euglena, Chlamydomonas and 
Spirogyra should be mentioned. 
 
Nutrition in Amoeba and Paramecium should 
be mentioned. 
 
 
A simplified outline of the chemical 
processes involved in glycolysis and Kreb's 
cycle; Reference should be made to the role 
of ATP. 
 
The importance of anaerobic respiration in 
food processing should be mentioned. 

 
 
6 
 
 
(c)    Excretion 
(i)    Excretion in single-celled aquatic       
       organisms. Diffusion by body surface        
       and by contractile vacuole. 
 
(ii)    Waste products of metabolism. 
 
 
 
(d)   Growth 
 
 (i)   Basis of growth - cell division   
             (mitosis), enlargement and    
             differentiation. 
 
 (ii)   Aspects of growth: 
      Increase in dry weight, irreversible    
      increase in size and length and increase    
      in number of cells. 
 
            (iii)  Regions of fastest growth in       
                   plants. 
 
            (iv)   Influence of growth hormones and       
                    auxins. 
 
             (v)   Growth curvatures (Tropisms) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) Development: Enlargement 
and differentiation. 
(f) Movement 
        (i)  Organelles for movement: cilia and 
flagella,  
         (ii)   Cyclosis. 
(g)    Reproduction: 
Types of reproduction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference should be made to carbon dioxide,          
water and ammonia as examples of waste  
products. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observation of root tip and shoot tip are 
required. 
 
Regulation of growth by hormones should be 
mentioned. 
 
Types of tropisms should be demonstrated. 
 
 
 
Microscopic examination of the different 
regions of growth and development: region of 
cell division, elongation, differentiation and 
maturation. 
 
Processes that result in primary and secondary 
growth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7 
 
(i)  Asexual: fission, budding and              
vegetative propagation. 
  
 
            (ii)  Sexual: Conjugation, formation of 
 male and female gametes 
 (gametogenesis), fusion of gametes 
fertilization)  
 
7.   (a)   Tissues and supporting systems: Skeleton 
     and supporting systems in animals: 
(i)      Biological significance. 
 
(ii)      Skeletal materials, e.g. bone,    
          cartilage and chitin. 
(iii)     Types of skeleton: 
exoskeleton, endoskeleton and 
hydrostatic skeleton. 
(iv)     Bones of the vertebral 
column, girdles and long bones of 
the appendicular skeleton. 
(v)     Mechanism of support in animals. 
(vi)    Functions of skeleton in animals: 
Protection, support, locomotion and 
respiratory movement. 
 
 
(b) Different types of supporting tissues in plants. 
 
(i) Main features of supporting tissues 
in plants. 
(ii) Functions of supporting tissues in 
 plants: strength, rigidity (resistance 
 against the forces of the wind and 
 water), flexibility and resilience.   
 
Prepared slides of: 
(a) fission in Paramecium 
(b) budding in yeast and Chlamydomonas; 
should be observed and drawn. 
 
     Prepared slides of conjugation in   
     Paramecium  and Spirogyra  should  be 
studied. The process of meiosis should be 
    
mentioned. 
 
 
The location and arrangement of skeletal and 
supporting tissues in animals should be 
mentioned. Candidates should be familiar with 
the general plan of mammalian skeleton and the 
different types of joints. They should be able to 
identify, draw, label and state the functions of 
the individual bones listed in the content 
column. Detailed structure of the skull will not 
be required. Histological structure of bones and 
cartilages will also not be required. 
 
 
 
Candidates should be able to explain how these 
functions are performed. The relationship of 
skeleton and muscles during movement should 
be used to illustrate the different functions of 
the skeleton. 
The different types of supporting tissues: turgid 
parenchyma, collenchyma, xylem (wood) 
sclerenchyma should be studied. 
 
Candidates should be able to cut and draw the 
low power of the T.S. of stem and root of a 
herbaceous plant and label the different tissues; 
epidermis, cortex and stele. 
 
 

 
 
8 
 
 
8.   Transport System: 
(a) Need for transport: 
(i)    surface area/volume ratio. 
(ii)   substances have to move greater  
      distances. 
 
 
 
 
(b) Transport in animals. 
(i) Structure of the heart, arteries,       
veins and capillaries. 
 
 
(ii) Composition and function of 
blood and lymph. 
(iii) Materials for transport: 
excretory products, gases, 
digested food, and other 
nutrients. 
 
(c) Transport in plants 
               (i) Uptake and movement of water   
                   and mineral salts in  plants. 
 
 
 
 
              (ii) Translocation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   (iii) Transpiration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source of materials and forms in which they are 
transported and where they are transported to 
should be studied. 
Media of transport: cytoplasm in cells, cell sap 
or latex in most plants and body fluid in 
invertebrates.  
 
Candidates should be familiar with the general 
circulatory system. Open circulatory systems in 
invertebrates. The names of the blood vessels 
responsible for transporting excretory products, 
gases, digested food and other nutrients should 
be mentioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Description of uptake of water and mineral 
salts from the soil into a plant. Movement 
of water and mineral salts through the plant. 
Experiments using eosin solution to show 
water and mineral salts uptake. 
 
Movement of organic materials from leaves 
to roots. Basic theories (Pressure flow 
hypothesis and cytoplasmic streaming) 
underlying translocation. 
Ringing experiment to demonstrate that 
transport of synthesized organic nutrients 
occurs  through the phloem. 
 

 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
                  (iv) Movement of water to  
                    the apex of trees and   
                    herbs.
     
 
 
 
 
9. Respiratory System: 
(a)     Body surface: cutaneous, gills and lungs. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)      Mechanisms of gaseous exchange in 
fish, toad, mammals and plants. 
 
 
10.   Excretory Systems and Mechanisms  
 Types of excretory systems: Kidney, stomata 
and lenticels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.   Regulation of Internal Environment            
(Homeostasis) 
 
(a)   Kidney: Structure and functions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)   Liver: 
Advantages and disadvantages of 
transpiration. Types of transpiration. 
Environmental factors affecting transpiration. 
Determination of the rate of transpiration.  
 
Physiological factors affecting the rise of 
water in the xylem: Root pressure,  
transpiration, cohesion- tension 
mechanism, adhesion, water potential 
gradient. Experiments to measure the rate of 
transpiration. 
 
Characteristics of respiratory surfaces in these 
systems should be studied. Respiratory organs 
of insects should be mentioned. 
 
Candidates should be able to observe, draw and 
label the respiratory organs of a bony fish (e.g. 
Tilapia) and a small mammal (e.g. rat) 
Respiratory movements in these animals should 
be mentioned. The mechanisms of opening and 
closing of stomata should be mentioned. 
Characteristics of excretory organs in these 
systems should be studied. Candidates 
should observe, draw and label the excretory 
organs of a small mammal (e.g. rat). 
 
Explanation of the concept of excretion in 
plants. Excretory products of plants (water, 
carbon dioxide, oxygen, alkaloids, tannins, 
gums, resins and acids) should be mentioned. 
 
Osmoregulation, excretion and maintenance of 
acid-base balance should be mentioned. The 
conditions that affect functions of the kidney 
such as the water and salt content of the blood, 
environmental temperature should also be 
mentioned. 
Excretory products such as urea, water, salts, 
uric acid should be mentioned. 

 
 
10 
 
 
Functions of the liver. 
 
(c)    The skin: 
 
 Structure and function. 
 
12.    Hormonal Coordination 
(a) Animal hormones: 
Site of secretion, functions and 
effects of over and under-
secretion. 
 
 
(b) Plant hormones 
 
 
13.   Nervous Coordination 
(a)   The central nervous system 
(i)     Components of the 
        central nervous system 
(ii)     Parts of the brain and their 
functions; cerebrum, cerebellum, 
medulla oblongata, hypothalamus 
and their functions 
(iii)    Structure and function of the Spinal 
Cord. 
    (b)     Peripheral Nervous System.  
 (i)      Somatic Nervous System 
(ii)     Autonomic nervous system. 
 
(iii)    Structure and functions of the 
neurone. 
(iv)    Classification of neurones. 
 
Candidates should be able to identify the liver; 
and its position relative to the gall bladder, bile 
duct, pancreas, duodenum and stomach. 
Candidates should observe, draw and label the 
mammalian skin. The regulation of internal 
environment by the skin should be emphasized. 
 
Endocrine glands: pituitary, thyroid, adrenal, 
pancreas, gonads and their secretions should be 
mentioned. The stages in the metamorphosis 
of toad and the role of thyroxine should be 
mentioned. 
 
 
The effects of auxins on lateral bud 
development, leaf fall and initiation of 
adventitious roots should be mentioned.  
Reference to crop harvesting, growth and weed 
control should be made. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Candidates should be able to locate the position 
of the brain and spinal cord in a dissected 
vertebrate and identify the various regions of 
the brain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions of the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic systems only. 
 
Candidates should observe, draw and label a 
neurone from a slide. 
 

 
 
11 
 
 
    (c)  Types of nervous actions  
 
 (i)      The reflex arc 
(ii)     Reflex and voluntary actions 
  (iii)      Differences  between  reflex  and 
   voluntary actions. 
  (iv)     Conditioned reflex and its role on 
   behaviour. 
 
 
14.    Sense Organs: Structure and function of 
   the 
 
(a) Eye.  
 
 
 
(b) Ear. 
 
15   (a)   Reproductive system of mammals 
(i) Structure and function of male and 
female reproductive systems. 
 
(ii) Differences between male and female 
reproductive organs. 
 
        (iii)     Structure of the gametes 
                  (sperm and ovum) 
     (iv)      Fertilization, development of the   
embryo and birth. 
         (v)  Birth control 
 
  (b)   Metamorphosis in insects, life histories of 
butterfly and cockroach. 
 
Afferent (sensory), efferent (motor) and 
intermediate neurones should be mentioned 
 
 
 
Candidates should perform experiments to 
illustrate reflex actions such as blinking of the 
eyes, knee jerk and withdrawal of hand from 
hot objects. 
 
 
 
Candidates   should   be   able   to   enumerate 
conditioned   reflexes   such   as   salivation, 
driving a car, walking and swimming.  
 
 
Candidates should examine the mammalian eye 
noting  the  shape,  colour  and  positions  of  the 
optic muscle and optic nerve. 
Mention should be made of eye defects and 
their corrections. 
 
Candidates should examine and draw dissected 
male and female small mammals showing the 
reproductive organs. They should also draw 
sperm and ovum from prepared slides. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation of the different methods of birth 
control. 
 

 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c)     Comparison of reproduction 
   in fish, amphibian, reptile, bird 
   and mammal. 
 
(d)      Reproduction in flowering 
   plants 
 
(i)  Arrangements  of  floral  parts  of  a 
named insect-pollinated flower and a 
named wind-pollinated flower. 
(ii)     Structure and function of the male and 
female parts of a flower. 
  
(e)      Pollination in Plants 
(i)    Types of pollination 
(ii)    Features of cross-pollinated and self-
pollinated flowers 
(iii)    Agents of Pollination 
 
(iv)    Kinds of placentation: axile, marginal 
 and parietal. 
 
(f) Process of development of 
zygote in flowering plants: 
Fertilization. 
 
 
(g)   (i)    Types of fruits (classification). 
(ii)   Structure of fruits 
 
 
 
These  examples  should  be  used  to  illustrate 
complete  and  incomplete  metamorphosis.  The 
period  it  takes  to  develop  from  egg  to  adult 
should  be  studied.  The  different  stages  in  the 
life history of butterfly and cockroach should be 
drawn and labelled. 
 
 
Reference  should  be  made  to  the  method  of 
fertilization, number of eggs and parental care. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Named examples should be used to illustrate the 
types of pollination. 
 
 
 
The features of the flower should be related 
to the agents of pollination. 
 
 
 
Pollen grains germinated in sucrose solution 
should be observed, prepared slides or charts 
showing various stages of embryo 
development in flowering plants should be 
observed and drawn. 
Fruits should be classified into dry and fleshy 
fruits. 
The internal structure of a leguminous fruit, 
orange, maize and tomato should be 
examined and drawn. 

 
 
13 
 
 
(h)   Dispersal of fruits and seeds: Agents of 
dispersal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.    Plant and Animal Nutrition 
1. Plant Nutrition 
(a)     Photosynthesis: 
(i)      Process of photosynthesis and its 
chemical equation 
(ii)      Light and dark reactions 
(iii)    Materials and conditions 
necessary for photosynthesis 
(iv)    Evidence of photosynthesis 
 
   (b)   Mineral requirement of plants  
    (i)   Mineral nutrition: Macro and       
   micro-nutrients 
 
 
 
    (ii)  Soil and atmosphere as sources of   
mineral elements. 
 
 
 
 
 
2.    Animal Nutrition  
 
(a) Food substances; classes and sources 
 
 
The following fruits should be studied as 
examples to show the features that aid their 
respective methods of dispersal. Sunflower 
(achene) Combretum, cotton, Crotalaria/bean, 
Desmodium, Bidens sp. Tridax sp. and Coconut. 
 
Distinguishing differences between a fruit and a 
seed should be mentioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
Biochemical nature of photosynthesis, 
photoactivation of chlorophyll resulting in the 
conversion of light energy to ATP and the 
reduction of NADP (Biochemical detail is not 
required) 
 
 
 
 
The translocating and storage of excess food as 
a result of photosynthesis should be mentioned.  
Test for starch in green leaves should be carried 
out. 
Fate of the products of photosynthesis should 
be mentioned. 
 
 
Macro elements should include: carbon, 
hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, potassium, 
phosphorus, magnesium, sulphur, calcium and 
iron. The micro elements should include: 
copper, manganese, zinc and boron. 
 
Candidates should distinguish between food 
produced and mineral elements. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
14 
 
 
 
     
       (b)   Balanced diet and its importance 
 
 
 
 
 
      (c ) Food tests 
 
    
   (d)  Digestive enzymes: 
Classes, characteristics and functions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e)   Modes of Nutrition 
(i)   Autotrophic: Photosynthesis, 
 
(ii)  Heterotrophic: holozoic, parasitic,     
     symbiotic and saprophytic. 
 
 
(f)    Alimentary System: 
 
Alimentary tract of different animals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(g) Dental Formula 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local examples as sources of food substance 
should be given. Reference should be made to 
food relationship between plants and animals. 
Importance of each class of food in a balanced 
diet should be stressed. Candidates should 
relate the idea of balanced diet to their own diet. 
Malnutrition and its effects on humans should be 
mentioned. 
Tests for starch, reducing sugar, protein, fats and 
oil should be carried out. 
Candidates  should  perform  experiments  to 
show  that  ptyalin  in  saliva  changes  cooked 
starch to reducing sugar. 
Candidates should know source, site of action, 
substrate and effect of each digestive enzyme. 
Experiments to show the characteristics of 
enzymes, including effects of pH, temperature 
and concentration should be carried out. 
 
 
 
 
Named examples should be used to illustrate 
different modes of nutrition. 
Comparison should be made using dissected 
named bird and mammal. 
Description and functions of parts of the 
alimentary canal and modification of parts to 
reflect their digestive functions should be 
mentioned. 
 
Meaning of dental formula. Determination of 
the dental formulae of mammals. 
Arrangements of teeth in the jaw bones of 

 
 
15 
 
(h)   Feeding in protozoa and mammals 
 
 
C.        Basic Ecological Concepts 
1.     Ecosystem: 
Components of the ecosystem and sizes 
(a) Ecological components: 
environment, biosphere, 
habitat, population, biotic 
community and ecosystem. 
 
       (b)    Components of the 
       ecosystem: 
      Biotic and abiotic 
 
 2.     Ecological factors: 
      Ecological factors in aquatic and  
      terrestrial ecosystems 
3. Simple Measurement of Ecological 
 Factors. 
(a) Physical factors: 
 Climatic, topographic and 
 gaseous. 
(b) Edaphic factors: Chemical 
 and physical composition, 
 moisture content and soil 
 texture. 
4. Food webs and trophic levels                  
 (a)   Autotrophs and Heterotrophs 
(i)   Producers: autotrophs 
(ii)   Consumers: heterotrophs  
(iii)  Decomposers 
(b) Trophic levels energy 
herbivores, carnivores and of humans. 
Importance of dental care in humans. 
 
Reference should be made to feeding habits in 
protozoa and mammals. 
 
 
 
Examples and explanation are required. 
 
 
 
Importance of ecological factors common to 
all habitat should be mentioned. The 
importance of ecological factors to 
population of animals and plants should be 
stressed.  
 
 
 
 
 
Candidates should measure some of the 
ecological factors including humidity, 
temperature, wind speed, rainfall and light 
intensity. 
 
 
 
Candidates should be able to classify organisms 
as producers, consumers and decomposers. 
 
 
 
 
Aquatic and terrestrial producers, consumers 
and decomposers should be known. 
 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
relationships 
(i)    Food chain  
(ii)    Food web 
(c) Energy flow 
(i)     Food/Energy relationship in aquatic and 
terrestrial environment. 
(ii)    Pyramid of energy and Pyramid of 
numbers. 
 
(d)     Decomposition in nature 
(i)   Decomposers: 
                  (micro and macro-decomposers) 
    (ii)   Gaseous products  
(iii) Role of decomposers  
 
 
 
6.     Ecological Management: 
(a)   Biological Associations 
Type of associations: Parasitism, 
symbiosis, commensalism and 
saprophytism. 
(b)   Adaptation of organisms to 
habitats. 
 
 
(c)   Pollution of the atmosphere 
 
 
 
 
Candidates should illustrate food relationships 
in a food chain and food web using specific 
examples. 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-cyclic nature of energy transfer should be 
mentioned. 
 
 
 
Candidates should be able to construct and 
explain pyramid of energy, pyramid of 
numbers and point out the major differences 
between them. 
 
Candidates should observe demonstrations to 
show that carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulphide, 
heat energy are released during decomposition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Features of biological importance associated 
with each type should be mentioned. Named 
examples should be used to illustrate these 
associations. 
 
 
 
 
Adaptations of plants and animals to 
environmental conditions with particular 

 
 
17 
 
 
(i)    Nature, names, sources and effects 
of air pollutants. 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  Effect of noise 
 
 
 
         (d) Water and Soil Pollution  
                  Type and effects of pollutants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.     Ecology of population 
 (a)    Ecological succession 
(i)    Structural changes in species composition, 
variety or diversity and increase in 
numbers. 
(ii)   General characteristics and outcomes of    
      succession 
(b)      Primary succession. 
 Succession in terrestrial and aquatic   
habitats. 
 
(c) Secondary succession, climax 
of the succession: characteristic 
of a stable ecosystem. 
reference to differences in habitats should be 
mentioned. 
 
 
 
 
Examples of air pollutants should include 
carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide, oxides of 
nitrogen, smoke, smog, dust and particles 
released into the air from factories. 
Health hazards and damage to the environment 
should be emphasized. 
 
Harmful effect of noise from generators, 
aeroplane and electronic sound gadgets, e.t.c. 
should be mentioned. 
 
 
Water and soil pollutants to be studied include: 
synthetic substances (detergent), insecticides, 
artificial fertilizers, herbicides, sewage, 
domestic and industrial wastes, crude oil and 
decaying organic matter. The health hazards and 
harmful effects of water and soil pollutants on 
organisms should also be mentioned. Mention 
should be made of oil spillage and its effects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Candidates should study succession in an 
abandoned farmland, lawn, and in a pond over a 
period of time to discover a definite sequence 
of colonization by plants. 

 
 
18 
 
(d) Factors that affect population 
size: natality, mortality, 
emigration, immigration, food 
shortage, predation,competition and 
diseases. 
 
(e)    Preservation and storage of foods 
 
 
 
 
(f)     The life of selected insects; 
        (i) Weevils and cotton strainers. 
        
 
       (ii) Control of pests    
 
 
8.   Microorganisms: Man and health  
(a)    Carriers of microorganisms 
 
 
 
(b)    Microorganisms in action 
(i)   Beneficial effects in nature, medicine 
and industries. 
 
 
(ii)   Harmful effects of microorganisms, 
diseases caused by microorganisms: 
cholera, measles, malaria and ring worm. 
 
(c)     Towards better Health 
(i)    Methods of .controlling harmful 
microorganisms: high temperature, 
antibiotics, antiseptics, high salinity and 
Reference should be made to population.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Description of various methods of preserving 
and storing food. The use of ionizing 
radiations (x-ray, etc) should be 
mentioned.  Explanation of the biological 
basis of preserving and storing food. Local 
methods of preserving food such as drying, 
salting and smoking should be mentioned. 
 
 
External features of weevils and cotton 
stainers, their mode of life, adaptation 
to their habitats and their economic 
importance.  
 
 
 
 
Various methods of pest control: physical, 
chemical biological, etc; and their advantages 
and disadvantages should be mentioned. 
 
 
Effects of micro-organisms on our bodies 
should be mentioned. 
Examples of carriers: housefly; mosquitoes; 
tsetsefly should be mentioned. 
Candidates should perform experiments on 
fermentation, curdling of milk etc. to illustrate 
the beneficial uses of microorganisms. 
 
The diseases should be studied with respect to 
the causative organisms, mode of transmission 

 
 
19 
 
dehydration. 
(ii)    Ways of controlling the vectors. 
 
(d) Public Health: 
The importance of the following towards the 
maintenance of good health practices:  
 
(i) Refuse and sewage disposal. 
 
 
 (ii) Immunization, vaccination  
  and inoculation (control of diseases). 
 
 
 
D.   Conservation of Natural Resources: 
1.   Resources to be conserved: soil, water, 
wildlife, forest and minerals. 
2.   Ways of ensuring conservation 
 
E.    Variation in Population 
1.   Morphological variations in the physical 
appearance of individuals 
 
 
(a) size, height and weight 
 
 
and symptoms. 
 
Effects of these methods on the micro-
organisms should be mentioned. 
 
 
 
Methods of controlling housefly and 
mosquito should be studied. 
Candidates should be familiar with the proper 
methods of carrying out these public health 
practices in their community.  
 
Various forms of immunization should be 
mentioned. 
Explanation of the terms immunization, 
vaccination and inoculation. Candidates 
should be able to show how these terms are 
related. 
 
 
 
The  meaning  and  need  for  conservation  of 
natural resources should be mentioned. 
 
Problems of conservation should be 
mentioned in relation to economic and social 
development, overgrazing and poaching.  
 
The following should be studied: 
(a) agencies responsible for 
conservation 
(b) conservation education 
(c) conservation laws 
(d) benefits of conservation. 
 
Variation can be classified into morphological 
and physiological or continuous and 
discontinuous. 

 
 
20 
 
 
(b) colour (skin, eye, hair coat of 
animals) 
 
(c) finger prints 
 
 
2.    Physiological Variations 
(a) Ability to roll tongue 
 
(b) Ability to taste 
phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) 
(c) Blood groups (ABO) 
classification) 
F.    Biology of Heredity (Genetics) 
1.   Genetic terminologies 
 
 
2.  Transmission and expression of characteristics in 
organisms. 
(a) Hereditary variation 
(b) Mendel's work in genetics 
 
 (i) Mendel’s experiments  
 
 (ii) Mendelian traits  
 
 (iii) Mendelian laws  
Candidates are required to measure heights and 
weights of pupils of the same age group and 
plot graphs of frequency distribution of the 
height and weight. 
Observe and record various skin colour, colour 
pattern of some animals (cow, goat, rabbits), 
colour pattern of plants (maize cob and leaves). 
Make finger prints and classify them into 
arches, loops, whorls and compounds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definition of the following basic genetic 
terms such as gene, genotype, phenotype, 
dominant, recessive, allele, locus, test cross, 
and back cross. 
 
Reference should be made to characters that 
can be transmitted from generation to 
generation such as colour of skin, eye,  hair, 
blood group, sickle cell, shape of face and 
nose. 
Mendel's experiment with red and white 
flowered peas should be mentioned. 
 
 
Mendel’s experiment on monohybrid and 
dihybrid inheritance should be mentioned. 
 

 
 
21 
 
3.    Chromosomes: The basis of heredity 
(a)    Structure 
 
 
 (b)    Process    of    transmission    of 
hereditary  characters  from  parents 
to offspring. 
 
4.    Probability in genetics (Hybrid formation). 
 
5.    Linkage, sex determination and sex linked    
      characters. 
 
6.    Application of the principles of heredity in: 
 
(a)     Agriculture 
 
 
(b) Medicine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
G.  Adaptation for survival and Evolution. 
 
1. Behavioural Adaptations in Social Animals. 
 
(a) Termites 
(b) Bees 
 
Reference should be made to dominant and 
recessive characters in plants and animals. 
 
 
 
 
 
Candidates should observe chromosomes in 
permanently prepared slides of cells and root 
tips of onion or lily. Candidates should study 
the structure of DNA and gene replication using 
models and charts. 
 
 
Segregation of genes at meiosis and 
recombination at fertilization should be used to 
explain the process of transmission of 
hereditary characters from parents to offspring. 
 
Computation of probability is not required. 
 
Explanation of the terms linkage, sex 
determination and sex linked characters such 
as haemophilia, colour blindness, baldness 
and hairy ear lobes. 
 
 
 
 
Data on cross-breeding experiments should be 
studied. 
Examples of new varieties of crops and 
livestock obtained through cross-breeding 
should be mentioned. The advantages and 
disadvantages of cross-fertilization, out and 
inbreeding should be explained. 
 
The application of knowledge of heredity in 
marriage counseling with particular reference to 
sickle cell anaemia and rhesus factor should be 
mentioned. 
 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    2.    Evolution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)       Evidence of evolution. 
 
 
 
         (b)  Theories of evolution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Candidates should be able to identify the 
various castes of social insects. 
The division of labour in social insects and the 
roles of different castes should be stressed. 
Examples of communication among animals 
such as contact notes and warning cries should 
be mentioned. Reference should be made to 
basking by lizard, territorial behaviour in birds 
and lizards and behaviour of other animals under 
unfavourable conditions-hibernation and 
aestivation. The behaviour of an organism as a 
member of a group and the effect of grouping 
on the behaviour of an organism should be 
mentioned. 
Candidates are expected to know the 
evolutionary trends in plants and animals such 
as from simple to complex structural 
adaptations and from aquatic to terrestrial 
organisms. 
The role of mutation in evolution should be 
mentioned. 
 
The following evidence of evolution should 
be mentioned: Paleontology (fossil records), 
comparative biochemistry, geographical 
distribution, comparative anatomy and 
physiology, adaptive radiation, comparative 
embryology and systematics. 
The contributions of Lamarck and Darwin to 
the development of the theory of evolution 
should be mentioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
23 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
A.    Introducing Biology 
 
 1.    Biology as a science of life 
  
 
     
       
 
       
 
 2.    Procedure for biological work 
 
       
 
       
 
 
       
 
 
 
3.    Importance of Biology 
        
 
4.    Body symmetry, sectioning and  
       orientation 
 
 
 
      
       
 
 
 
 
 
5.   The microscope 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The meaning of biology. Candidates must be 
able to differentiate between a living thing 
and an organism.  The two major branches of 
biology: Botany and zoology; specialized 
areas: bacteriology, molecular biology, 
histology, cell biology, ecology etc. 
 
 
Description of skills required by biologists in 
their work. The scientific method: Identifying 
the problem, defining the problem, 
hypothesizing, experimenting, recording, 
analyzing and concluding. Description of 
following steps for writing report on 
biological experiment or investigation: Aim, 
hypothesis/ scientific framework, materials/ 
drawing of set-up, method, results/ 
observation, discussion and conclusion.  
 
Application of biology to everyday life.  
Careers associated with the study of biology. 
 
Description of the following terms :  
(i)   Body symmetry (bilateral and radial) 
(ii)  Sectioning: longitudinal and    
       transverse and vertical 
(iii) Body orientation of specimen:     
       anterior, posterior, lateral, dorsal and  
       ventral views). 
Distinction between   
(i)   posterior and anterior views 
SECTION B 
(For candidates in Ghana only) 

 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.    Biological drawings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.    Cell Biology 
         
 
1.  Movement  of  substances  into  and  out  of 
cells: Endocytosis and Exocytosis 
 
 
2.   Nucleic acids 
 
 
 
 
 
3.      DNA structure and replication,  
         RNA transcription.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.      Protein synthesis 
 
 
 
(ii)  dorsal and ventral views 
(iii) transverse and longitudinal section 
 
Examination of simple light, compound light 
and stereoscopic light microscopes and 
identification of the various parts. 
 
Handling and caring for microscopes. Use 
of the light microscope to observe 
prepared slides. Techniques involved in the 
preparation of temporary slides of animal and 
plant cells. Mounting varieties of specialized 
eukaryotic cells. Drawing of cells as seen 
under the microscope. 
 
Resolution and magnification of 
microscope. Determination of magnification 
of drawings. Measuring lengths using 
compound light microscope. Electron 
microscope should be mentioned 
 
Appropriate headings for biological drawings. 
Magnification/ size of biological drawings. 
Quality of biological drawings e.g. clarity of 
lines, neatness of labels, labels of biological 
drawings. 
 
 
 
 
Explanation of the process of endocytosis 
( phagocytosis and pinocytosis) and 
exocytosis. 
 
Explanation of the term nucleic acid. Types 
of nucleic acids: Deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). Basic 
chemical differences between DNA and 
RNA. 
 
Description of double helix model of 
DNA structure by Watson and Crick. 
Processes of DNA replication and RNA 
transcription.  
 
 
 

 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
5.      Cell cycle 
           
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
C.     Life Processes in Living Things 
 
1.      Amoeba, Paramecium, and   
Euglena 
      
 
 
2.      Spirogyra and Rhizopus 
 
 
 
 
3.      Mosses and ferns 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.    Diversity of Living Things 
 
1.     Characteristics of some of the  
        orders of Class Insecta 
 
 
 
Description of the process of protein 
synthesis. The roles of m-RNA, t-RNA, 
and r-RNA and ribosomes in protein 
synthesis must be emphasized. Importance 
of protein synthesis. Examples of proteins 
synthesized by humans. 
 
Explanation of the of the term cell cycle. 
Phases of the cell cycle [Interphase: G + S + 
G2 phases, Mitosis: M phase 
( karyokinesis and cytokinesis)].  The 
processes of mitosis and meiosis and their 
importance. Preparation of a squash of onion 
root tip and observing stages of meiosis under 
the microscope. Observing stages of meiosis 
in plant and animal cells (Permanent slides 
may be used). 
 
 
 
 
External structure and life processes of 
Amoeba, Paramecium, and Euglena. 
Mounting of Paramecium and Euglena under 
the compound light microscope. 
 
Structure of Spirogyra and Rhizopus. 
Nutrition and reproduction of Spirogyra and 
Rhizopus. Identification of stages of 
conjugation of Spirogyra. 
 
Structure of mosses (Brachymenium and 
Funaria) and ferns (Nephrolepis, 
( Platycerium, Phymatodes). Description 
of external features of mosses and ferns. 
Nutrition and reproduction in mosses. 
Reproduction in ferns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
26 
 
2.     Identification of organisms using  
        biological keys 
 
 
 
E.     Interactions in Nature      
      Soil 
 
 
 
F.     Mammalian Anatomy and Physiology   
 
1.     Dissection of a small mammal      
      
 
 
 
 
 
2.     Transport:  
         Structure of the mammalian heart. 
 
3.      Cellular respiration 
 
 
4.      Movement: 
 
         (a)  Muscles 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (b) Skeletal tissues 
        
5.      Reproduction 
(a) Secondary sexual characteristics 
         
 
 
 
(b) Prenatal/Antenatal care 
           
 
 
Orders of  Class Insecta (Odonata 
Orthoptera, Coleoptera, Hymenoptera, 
Hemiptera, Diptera, Isoptera, Lepidoptera, 
Dictyoptera, and Neuroptera). 
 
 
Identification of organisms using numbered 
and dichotomous keys. Construction of 
identification keys. 
 
 
 
Identification of mineral salts (Ca
2+
, Fe
2+
, 
Fe
3+
, Mg
2+
, K
+
, SO
4 
-
, NO
3 
-
, PO
4 
-
) in a soil 
sample. Soil reclamation. 
 
 
 
The arrangement of internal organs of 
mammals. Functions of the internal organs. 
Candidates should be able to cut open  a 
chloroformed mammal (guinea pig, rat,  
mouse and rabbit) and draw the internal 
organs. 
 
Mechanism of the heartbeat: excitation and 
contractions (SAN, AVN, Purkinge tissue) 
 
Determination of respiratory quotient (RQ) of 
different substrates. Explanation of the 
significance of RQ. 
 
 
Types of muscle (Smooth, striated and  
cardiac muscles). Description of how muscles 
bring about movement.  
Explanation of sliding filament model of 
muscle contraction. 
 
 
 
Description of the structure of skeletal 
tissues( Bones and cartilage). 
 
Physical changes that occur in males and 
females during puberty. The role of hormones 
in the development of secondary sexual 

 
 
27 
 
  
G.    Plant Structure and Physiology 
 
1.     Morphology of monocotyledonous   
           and dicotyledonous plants.   
 
 
        
 
 
 
2.        Transport: 
           Guttation 
 
3.        Reproduction: 
           Floral formula 
 
 
 
H.       Humans and their Environment 
 
1.        Integrated water resources  
           management. 
 
 
 
2.        Health and hygiene 
          
 
 
 
           (a)    Drug abuse 
 
 
           (b)     Community health 
          
  
           (c)     First Aid 
 
 
I.    Evolution 
 
       Recombinant DNA Technology 
 
J.    Biology and Industry 
 
1.    Biology and water industry 
characteristics in humans. 
 
Meaning of antenatal care. Antenatal visits 
requirements. Nutrition and diet. Exercise 
during pregnancy. Benefits of the use of 
natural products by mother and child. 
 
 
 
External features of monocotyledonous and 
dicotyledonous plants. Functions of roots, 
stems and leaves of monocotyledonous and 
dicotyledonous plants. Differences between 
monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous 
plants. Modifications of roots, stems and 
leaves.  
 
Biological principles underlying guttation.  
 
 
Determination and writing of the floral 
formulae of the following flowers: 
Flamboyant (Delonix), Pride of Barbados 
(Caesalpinia) and Rattle box (Crotalaria). 
Floral diagrams are not required. 
 
 
Description of the integrated water resources 
management (IWRM). Explanation of how 
IWRM can reduce undesirable change in the 
environment. 
 
Definition of terms: health, hygiene, and 
sanitation. Means of achieving personal 
cleanliness/ hygiene. 
 
 
Explanation of the term drug abuse. 
Consequences of drug abuse. 
 
Importance of town planning and its effects 
on health of the community. 
 
Explanation of the term First Aid. Different 
methods of administering First Aid. 
 
 

 
 
28 
 
   
       (a)     Contamination of water 
         
 
 
       (b)      Identification of polluted  
                  water 
       (c)      Waste water treatment 
 
 
2.     Biology and fishing industry 
 
        (a)      Fish stock management 
 
 
 
 
        (b)      Fish farming 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.     Biology and food industry: 
        Food additives 
 
 
 
 
4.      Biology and agriculture 
 
 
 
 
 
5.      Biotechnology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation of the term Recombinant DNA 
Technology and state its application. 
 
 
 
 
Candidates should carry out experiments to 
test water samples for bacterial 
contamination. 
 
The use of  Biological Oxygen  Demand 
(BOD) in the measurement of the level of  
organic pollution in water. 
 
Description of biological processes of 
purifying sewage. Cesspit activated sludge  
process should be mentioned. 
 
 
Explanation of why fish is an efficient 
converter of plankton into flesh. 
Description of ways of conserving fish 
stocks in water bodies. 
 
Importance of fish farming. Advantages and 
disadvantages of fish farming. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation of the term food additives. 
Identification of the categories of food 
additives (Naturally occurring and artificial 
food additives). Health implications in the use 
of food additives. 
 
Explanation of the biological principles by 
which fertilizer, pesticides, selective 
breeding, resistance to disease and irrigation 
can respectively  lead to successful 
agriculture. 
 
Explanation of the concept of biotechnology. 
The use of micro-organisms in the 

 
 
29 
 
 
6.      Biological fuel generation 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
A.    Concept of Living 
 
1. Cell theory 
 
 
2. Irritability as a basic characteristic of 
protoplasm  
 
 (a) Types of responses: taxis and nastism  
 
            (b) Environmental factors that evoke     
    responses; temperature, pH etc 
3.  Excretory Systems 
(a)   Diseases of the kidney: 
        Nephritis, kidney stone and diuresis, Their 
manufacture of food such as cheese, yoghurt, 
kenkey, bread and butter. The role of micro-
organisms in the production of alcoholic 
drinks and organic acids. The role of micro-
organisms in pharmaceutical, tanning and 
mining industries. 
 
Explanation of the need for new sources of 
energy. The use of biogas, use of green crops 
to produce ethanol, the generation of 
hydrogen gas from chloroplasts should be 
mentioned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The cell theory including the work of Hooke, 
Dujardin, Schleiden and Schwann should be 
outlined. 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION C 
(For candidates in Nigeria, Sierra Leone,  
The Gambia and Liberia) 

 
 
30 
 
effects and remedies. 
 
(b)   Diseases of the liver: infective 
hepatitis, cancer of the liver and gall 
stones. Their effects and remedies. 
4.  Sense organs. 
(a) Nose. 
 
(b) Tongue. 
 
 
(c) The skin. 
 
5.      Reproduction 
(a)  Courtship behaviour in animals: 
(i)   Pairing 
(ii)  Display e.g. peacocks 
(iii) Territoriality 
(iv)   Seasonal migration 
associated with breeding in 
herrings, eels and birds. 
   (b) Metamorphosis and life 
history of housefly. 
(c)  Adaptive features in a 
developing animal: 
(i)  Yolk in egg of fish, toad and birds 
for nourishment 
(ii)  Placenta in animals 
 
 
(d)     Germination of seeds  
 
(i) Essential factors 
which affect developing embryo. 
 
 
 
 
Excretory organs of earthworm and insects 
should be mentioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The process of perception of smell including the 
roles  of  sensory  cells  in  nose  and  olfactory 
lobes should be studied.  
 
 
 
Experiments should be carried out to determine 
the different areas of the tongue associated with 
different  tastes.  The  association  between  the 
organs of taste and smell should be mentioned. 
Mention should be made of taste buds. 
The  function  of  the  skin  as  a  sensory  organ 
should be emphasized. 
 
Courtship pattern in male and female 
animals and territorialism in lizards should 
be observed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The content (yolk and albumen) of birds' egg 
should be examined  
Candidates should observe the connection of the 
foetus to the mother and the adaptive features of 

 
 
31 
 
(ii)     Types of germination  
 
B.   Plant and Animal Nutrition 
1.    Nitrogen cycle 
 
 
 
2.   Modes of nutrition: 
autotrophic, chemosynthetic, carnivorous 
plants 
 
3.   Alimentary System 
(a)    Alimentary tracts of different animals 
  (b)    Description and function of various 
parts. 
 
4.   Feeding habits 
(a)   Categories: Carnivorous, herbivorous 
and omnivorous 
(b)  Modifications and mechanisms 
associated with the following habits; filter 
feeding, fluid feeding, feeding adaptation in 
insects, saprophytic feeding, parasitic feeding 
etc. 
 
 
C. Basic Ecological Concepts 
1. Ecological Components: 
Lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, niche 
 
2.Population Studies by Sampling 
(a) Population size 
(b) Dominance 
(c) Density 
   
3. Energy transformation in nature: 
(a) Energy loss in the ecosystem 
 
               (b) Solar radiation: its intake and loss at 
the placenta, umbilical cord and amnion in a 
dissected pregnant rat. The meaning of 
oviparity and viviparity should be mentioned. 
Experiments  to  show  the  importance  of 
oxygen,  adequate  moisture  and  suitable 
temperature, should be carried out. 
 
The stages in hypogeal and epigeal germination 
should be observed and drawn 
 
 
 
The  names  and  roles  of  bacteria  involved  in 
nitrogen    cycle    should    be    mentioned. 
Candidates   to   observe   root   nodules   in 
leguminous plants. 
 
Examples of carnivorous plants should be 
studied. 
 
Comparison should be made using dissected 
earthworm, grasshopper/cockroach to show the 
important features of the alimentary canal. 
Use a bird and cockroach/grasshopper to show 
modifications for functions 
 
 
 
 
 
Mosquito larva, housefly, butterfly, cockroach, 
adult mosquito, maize weevil, rhizopods, 
tapeworm should be used to illustrate the 
different types of feeding mechanisms and 
various modifications. 
 
 
 
 
Candidates are expected to explain and give 
examples of the terms. 
 
Candidates are required to carry out a project to 
determine population density by counting the 
individual types of plants and animals and record 

 
 
32 
 
                       the earth's surface. 
 
               (c ) Energy loss in the biosphere. 
 
 
 
4.   Nutrient Cycling in Nature 
 
(a) Carbon Cycle: 
(i)  Process of carbon cycle  
(ii) Importance of carbon in nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Water Cycle: 
(i)   Importance of water cycle, 
(ii)  Importance of water to living 
organisms. 
5.   Ecological Management: Tolerance, Minimum 
and maximum range 
 
 
 
 
6.  Habitats 
(a) Aquatic habitat: marine, estuarine fresh water 
under the following headings: 
(i)    characteristics of habitat  
(ii)   distribution of plants and 
        animals in the habitat,  
             (iii) adaptive features of plants and  
                    animals in the habitat. 
 
(b) Terrestrial habitat: marsh, forest, grass land, 
arid land should be studied under the 
following headings: 
 
 
such count in a given plot. 
Laws of thermodynamics and its application to 
ecological phenomena should be mentioned. 
The laws of thermodynamics should be used to 
explain energy flow across tropic levels. 
Candidates should discuss energy as a limiting 
factor in primary production i.e production of 
autotrophs. 
Reference should be made to harvest as a 
means of measuring primary production. 
 
Candidates should be able to draw the carbon 
cycle, list the sources of carbon (burning, 
respiration, decay) and discuss the relative 
importance of the cycle. 
Reference should be made to carbon dioxide-
oxygen balance in nature. 
Candidates should carry out experiments to 
show absorption of carbon dioxide and release 
of oxygen during photosynthesis. 
 
Candidates should carry out experiments to 
show the presence of water in expired air and 
that water is given off during respiration. 
Candidates should perform experiments to 
show the limit of tolerance of Tilapia to various 
concentrations of salt solution or sensitivity of 
wood lice to temperature. 
 
 
Measurement of physical factors: 
temperature, salinity, light intensity, turbidity, 
current, pH, should be carried out. 
 
The pattern of distribution including dominant 
types and seasonal changes of population, size 
of organisms in the habitat should be noted. 

 
 
33 
 
 
(i)   characteristics of habitat 
 
(ii)   distribution of plants and animals in 
habitat. 
 
(c) Balance in Nature 
     Dynamic equilibrium population and      
     population density. 
7.   Relevance of Biology to Agriculture: 
(a) Classification of plants based on life cycle 
 
        (b) Effects of agricultural practices on ecology 
(i)   Bush burning  
(ii) Tillage  
(iii) Fertilizer  
(iv) Herbicide/pesticide  
(v)  Different farming methods 
 
  8.  Microorganisms: Man and His Health. 
(a)  Microorganisms around us  
     (i)  Microorganisms in air and water 
(ii) Groups of microorganisms: bacteria, 
viruses, some algae, protozoa and some 
fungi. 
       (b)  Microorganisms in our bodies and food 
     
 
 
The measurement of the physical factors, 
temperature, relative humidity, light, wind, 
and pH should be carried out. 
Reference should be made to edaphic factors. 
The effect of physical factors on distribution 
of plants and animals should be mentioned. 
 
The process by which carnivores maintain a 
constant population should be mentioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effects of human activities on ecological 
systems should be mentioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microorganisms in air, water and expired air 
should be observed and identified by their 
colour, pattern of growth and appearance of 
their colony. 
 
 

 
 
34 
 
 
 
 
 
       (c) Public Health 
 Food hygiene and health organization. 
 
D.   Application of Variations 
1. Crime detection 
 
2. Blood transfusion 
 
3. Determination of paternity 
E.   Evolution 
1. Adaptation for survival 
(a) Factors that bring about 
competition 
(b) Intra and Inter-species 
competition 
 
 
 
(c)  Relationship between 
competition and succession 
 
2.   Structural Adaptation for; 
(a) obtaining food 
(b) protection and defense 
(c) securing mates for 
reproduction 
(d) regulating body temperature 
(e) conserving water 
 
 
 
Microorganisms under the finger nails, mouth 
cavity, expired air, and decomposing food 
substance should be observed and identified by 
their colour, pattern of growth, and appearance 
of colony. 
Reference should be made to the roles of 
national and international health organizations 
in maintenance of good public health. 
 
 
The uniqueness of each individual's finger print 
should be mentioned in relation to crime 
detection. 
Reference should be made to importance of 
knowledge of blood groups in blood 
transfusion and determination of paternity. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference should be made to the factors such 
as food, space, water, light and mates which 
organisms share and form the basis of 
competition. 
The effects of intra-species competition 
should be observed by growing many 
seedlings of maize in a small area, while the 
effects of interspecies competition can be 
observed by planting many seedlings of 
maize and pepper in a small area. 
Candidates  should  observe  competition 
and  succession  on  a  moistened  exposed 
slice of bread over a period of time. 
 
 
Candidates should observe examples of 

 
 
35 
 
   3. Adaptive Colouration 
(a) Plants and animals 
(b) Colouration and their 
functions 
 
 
organisms that show structural adaptation for 
obtaining food, escaping from enemies, 
securing mates, regulating body temperature 
and conserving water. 
 
Candidates are required to observe examples of 
adaptive colouration in plants and animals. 
 
 