1 
 
       
ENGLISH LANGUAGE  
 
PREAMBLE 
 
This examination sets out to test the different basic skills of communicating in English using the 
mediums of speech and writing. The examination will test the receptive and productive abilities 
of candidates. These abilities will be demonstrated in the following forms: reading, 
comprehension, summary, vocabulary, lexis and structure, listening comprehension and 
recognition of different aspects of spoken English. 
 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
 
The objective of the syllabus is to measure the extent to which the aims of the teaching 
syllabuses of member countries have been realized in candidates’ secondary school career. The 
examination sets out to examine candidates’ ability to 
 
(i) use correct English; 
(ii) write about incidents in English that are appropriate to specified audiences and situations; 
(iii) organize material in paragraphs that are chronologically, spatially and logically coherent; 
(iv) control sentence structures accurately; 
(v) exhibit variety in the use of sentence patterns; 
(vi) comply with the rules of grammar; 
(vii) spell and punctuate correctly; 
(viii) comprehend written and spoken English; 
(ix) recognize implied meaning, tones and attitudes; 
(x) use an acceptable pronunciation that can be comprehended by others; 
(xi) recognize the physical characteristics of English sounds and the letters that represent 
them. 
(xii) pick out and summarize relevant information from set passages.  
 
SCHEME OF EXAMINATION 
 
There will be three papers – Papers 1, 2 and 3, all of which must be taken. Papers 1 and 2 will be 
a composite paper to be taken at one sitting. 
PAPER 1: Will consist of eighty multiple choice questions, all of which should be answered 
within 1 hour for 40 marks. 
PAPER 2: Will consist of five essay topics and a passage each to test candidates’ 
comprehension and summary skills. Candidates will be expected to write an essay 
on one of the topics and answer all the questions on the comprehension and 
summary passages. The paper will last 2 hours and carry 100 marks. 

2 
 
PAPER 3: Will consist of sixty multiple choice items on Test of Orals for candidates in 
Nigeria and Liberia, and Listening Comprehension Test for candidates in the 
Gambia and Sierra Leone. All the questions should be answered in 45 minutes for 
30 marks. 
 
DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 
   PAPER 1: (For candidates in The Gambia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Liberia only) 
 
 This is an objective/multiple choice paper comprising eighty questions: forty lexical and 
forty structural questions. Each question will have four options lettered A to D. 
 
A. LEXIS 
 
In addition to items testing knowledge of the vocabulary of everyday usage (i.e home, 
social relationships,  and common core school subjects) questions will be set to test 
candidates’ ability in the use of the general vocabulary associated with the following 
fields of human activity: 
 
       I.         (a) Building and Building  Construction; 
(b) Agriculture; 
(c)  Fishing; 
(d) Stock exchange; 
(e)  Health; 
(f)  Environment; 
(g) Culture, Institutions and Ceremonies; 
(h)  Law and Order; 
(i)  Motor Vehicles and Travelling; 
(j)  Government and Administration; 
(k) Sports; 
(l)  Religion; 
(m) Science and Technology; 
(n)  Animal husbandry; 
(o) Advertising; 
(p) Human Internal Body system and function. 
 
II. Idioms, i.e. idiomatic expressions and collocations (e.g. ‘hook, line and sinker’, ‘every 
Tom, Dick and Harry” etc.) the total meaning of which cannot be arrived at simply by 
consideration of the dictionary meanings of the words in the structures in which they 
appear. 
III. Structural elements of English e.g. sequence of tenses, matching of pronouns with their 
antecedents, correct use of prepositions etc. 
 
IV. Figurative Usage 
 

3 
 
 The term ‘general’ vocabulary refers to those words and usage of words normally 
associated with the fields of human activity in A1 above which are generally known, used 
and understood by most educated people who, while not engaged in that field of activity 
may have occasion to read, speak or write about it. Thus, for example, in the vocabulary 
of transportation by road, one would expect knowledge of terms such as ‘pedestrian 
bridge’ and ‘traffic signs’ which most educated people understand, but not ‘berm’ or 
‘camber’ which are specialized. 
 
 All items will be phrased in such a way as to test the use and understanding of the 
required lexis, rather than dictionary definitions and explanations. In practice, the test of 
lexis will be so designed as to explore, not merely the extent of the candidates’ 
vocabulary but more importantly their ability to respond to sense relations in the use of 
lexical items e.g. synonyms, antonyms and homonyms. 
 
 In the test of figurative language, candidates will be expected to recognize when an 
expression is used figuratively and not only when it is used literally. 
 
B. STRUCTURE 
 
Structure here includes: 
(i) The patterns of changes in word-forms which indicate number, tense, degree, etc; 
(ii) The patterns in which different categories of words regularly combine to form 
groups and these groups in turn combine to form sentences; 
(iii) The use of structural words e.g. conjunctions, determiners, prepositions, etc. 
 
PAPER 1: (For candidates in Ghana only) 
This is a multiple choice objective paper comprising eighty questions which will be made 
up of two parts: Parts A and B. Part A will consist of thirty lexical and twenty structured 
questions, while Part B will have thirty objective questions on literature.  
Each question will have four options lettered A to D. 
 
A. LEXIS 
 
In addition to items testing knowledge of the vocabulary of everyday usage (i.e. home, 
social relationships, common core school subjects) questions will be set to test the 
candidates’ ability in the use of the general vocabulary associated with the following 
fields of human activity: 
 
I.    (a) Building; 
(b) Plumbing; 
(c) Fishing; 
(d) Finance – commerce, banking, stock exchange, insurance; 

4 
 
(e) Photography; 
(f) Mineral exploration; 
(g) Common manufacturing industries; 
(h) Printing, publishing, the press and libraries; 
(i) Sea, road, rail and air transport; 
(j) Government and politics; 
(k) Sports and entertainment; 
(l) Religion; 
(m)     Science and Technology; 
(n) Power production – hydro, thermal, solar; 
(o) Education; 
(p) Communication; 
(q) Military; 
(r) Journalism and Advertising. 
  
The term ‘general vocabulary’ refers to those words and usage of words normally 
associated with the relevant field of human activity in (i) above which are 
generally known, used and understood by most educated people, who, while not 
engaged in that field of activity, may have occasion to read, speak or write about 
it.  Thus, for example, in the vocabulary of transportation by sea, one would 
expect knowledge of terms such as “bridge” and “deck”, which most educated 
people understand but not “halyard”, “dodge”, “davit” or “thrust block”, which 
are specialized. 
 
II. Idioms, i.e., idiomatic expressions and collocations (e.g. “hook, line and sinker”, 
“every Tom, Dick and Harry” etc) the total meaning of which cannot be arrived at 
simply by the consideration of the dictionary meanings of words in the structures in 
which they appear. 
 
III. Structural elements of English e.g. sequence of tenses, concord and the use  
of correct prepositions, matching of pronouns with their antecedents, etc. 
 
IV.           Figurative Usage 
All items will be phrased in such a way as to test the use and understanding of the 
required lexis, rather than dictionary definitions and explanations.  In practice, the test 
of lexis will be designed to explore, not merely the extent of the candidates’ 
vocabulary but more importantly their ability to respond to sense relations in the use 
of lexical items e.g. synonyms, antonyms and homonyms. 
 

5 
 
In the test of figurative language, candidates will be expected to recognize when an 
expression is used figuratively and not only when it is used. 
 
 
 B. STRUCTURE 
 
Structure here includes: 
 
(i) The patterns of changes in word-forms which indicate number, tense, 
degree, etc. 
(ii) The patterns in which different categories of words regularly combine to 
form groups and these groups in turn combine to form sentences; 
(iii)     The use of structural words e.g. conjunctions, determiners, prepositions, 
etc. 
 
         C. LITERATURE 
 
The objective questions on Literature will be as follows: 
      10 questions on Drama 
      10 questions on Prose 
      10 questions on Poetry 
 
NOTE:     For Prose and Drama the candidate is to study one prescribed text each.  
 
PAPER 2: (For all candidates) 
 
The paper will be divided into three sections: Sections A, B and C. Candidates will be required 
to spend 2 hours on this paper. 
  
SECTION A:  ESSAY WRITING  (50 marks) 
 
Candidates will be required to spend 50 minutes on this section. There will be five questions in 
all and candidates will be required to answer only one question. 
 
The questions will test candidates’ ability to communicate in writing. The topics will demand the 
following kinds of writing: 
 
(i) letter; 
(ii) speech; 
(iii) narration; 
(iv) description; 
(v)  argument/debate; 

6 
 
(vi) report; 
(vii) article; 
(viii) exposition; 
(ix) creative writing. 
 
Marks will be awarded for: 
(i) Content: relevance of ideas to the topic; 
(ii) Organization: formal features (where applicable), good paragraphing, appropriate 
emphasis and arrangement of ideas; 
(iii) Expression: effective control of vocabulary and sentence structure; 
(iv) Mechanical Accuracy: correct grammar, punctuation, spelling etc. 
 
The minimum length will be 450 words. 
 
SECTION B: COMPREHENSION (20 marks) 
 
Candidates will be required to spend 30 minutes on this section. The section will consist of 
one passage of at least three hundred and fifty (350) words. Candidates will be required to 
answer all the questions on the passage. 
 
The questions will test candidates’ ability to 
(i) find appropriate equivalents for selected words or phrases; 
(ii) understand the factual content; 
(iii) make inferences from the content of the passage; 
(iv) understand  the use of English expressions that reveal/reflect 
sentiments/emotions/attitudes; 
(v) identify and label basic grammatical structures, words, phrases or clauses and explain 
their functions as they appear in the context; 
(vi) identify and explain basic literary terms and expressions; 
(vii) recast phrases or sentences into grammatical alternatives. 
 
The passage will be chosen from a wide variety of sources all of which should be suitable for 
this level of examination in terms of theme and interest. The passage will be written in 
modern English that should be within the experience of candidates. The comprehension test 
will include at least four questions based on (ii) above. 
 
SECTION C:  SUMMARY  (30 marks) 
 
Candidates will be required to spend 40 minutes on this section. The section will consist of 
one prose passage of about five hundred (500) words and will test candidates’ ability to 
 
(i) extract relevant information; 
(ii) summarize the points demanded in clear concise English, avoiding repetition and 
redundancy; 
(iii) present a summary of specific aspects or portions of the passage. 
 

7 
 
 
The passage will be selected from a wide variety of suitable sources, including excerpts from 
narratives, dialogues and expositions of social, cultural, economic and political issues in any 
part of the world. 
 
 
PAPER 3:  ORAL ENGLISH  (30 marks)     
 
This paper will test candidates’ knowledge of Oral English. There will be two alternatives for 
this paper:  Candidates in Ghana, The Gambia and Sierra Leone will be tested in listening 
comprehension and those in Nigeria and Liberia will take a paper on test of oral.  
 
 Listening Comprehension Test (For candidates in Ghana, The Gambia and Sierra Leone) 
 
This will be made up of sixty multiple choice objective questions on: 
 
  Consonants, consonant clusters, vowels, diphthongs, stress and intonation patterns, 
dialogues and narratives. 
 
Section 1: Test of word final voiced-voiceless consonants in isolated words mainly, but other 
features such as consonant clusters may also be tested. 
 
Section 2: Test of vowel quality in isolated words. 
 
Section 3: Test of vowel quality and consonant contrasts in isolated words. 
 
Section 4: One of three options below will be used in different years: 
 
(i) test of vowel and/or consonant contrasts in sentence contexts; 
(ii) test of vowel and consonant contrasts in isolated words- to be selected from a list 
of at least four-word contrasts; 
(iii) test of vowel and consonant contrasts through rhymes. 
 
Section 5: Test of rhymes 
 
Section 6: Test of comprehension of emphatic stress 
 
Section 7: Test of understanding of the content of longer dialogues and narratives 
 
NOTE:          CD players will be used for the administration of this Listening  Comprehension 
Test. 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
  Features to be tested 
 
1. CONSONANTS 
(a) Single Consonants – Candidates should be able to recognize and produce all 
significant sound contrasts in the consonantal system of English. For the guidance of  
candidates, a few examples of such contrasts are given below. 
 
Initial   Medial     Final 
they  –  day  buzzes  –  buses     boat     –  both 
ship  –   chip  parcel   –  partial   breathe  –  breed 
fan  –    van  sopping – sobbing  wash    –  watch 
pit   –     fit   written  –  ridden   leaf      –  leave 
pit  –     bit   anger    –  anchor   cup      –  cub 
tuck – duck  faces     -        phrases   cart      –  card 
card – guard  prices     –        prizes      
gear – jeer 
 
(b) Consonant Clusters – Candidates should be able to produce and recognize consonant 
clusters which may occur both initially and finally in a syllable. They should also be 
able to recognize and produce the consonant sounds in a consonant cluster in the right 
order. For the guidance of candidates, a few examples are given below. 
 
Initial       Final 
play  –  pray       rains    - range 
sting  –  string     felt      –  felled 
scheme     –  scream   sent     –  send 
crime  –  climb     nest     –  next 
flee  –  free        ask  –  axe 
three  –  tree       lift  –  lived 
true  –  drew      missed  –  mixed 
blight  –  bright     seats    –  seeds 
tread  –  thread    hens     –  hence 
drift  –  thrift      lisp      –  lips 
glade  –  grade      coast    –  coats 
           marks   –  masks 
 
II. VOWELS 
 
(a) Pure Vowels 
(b) Diphthongs 
(c) Triphthongs 
 
Candidates should be able to recognize and produce all the significant sound contrasts in the 
vowel system of English. For the guidance of candidates, a few examples of such contrasts are 
given below. 
 

9 
 
seat     - sit 
sit - set 
peck    - pack 
pack    - park 
cart     - cat 
load    - lord 
pair     - purr 
park    - port 
hard    - heard 
word   - ward 
let - late 
cheer   - chair 
pet - pat  - part     - pate 
hat - heart    - height  - hate    - hut 
caught - cot  - cut - curt 
pool    - pull      - pole 
bird    - bed      - bared 
but - bat 
 
III. STRESS 
 
(a) Word Stress - Candidates should be able to contrast stressed and unstressed syllables in 
words which are not otherwise distinguished. In addition, they should be aware of the 
possibility of shifting stress from one syllable to another in different derivations of the 
same word with consequent change in vowel quality. For the guidance of candidates, a 
few examples of changing word stress are given below. 
 
‘increase (noun)  in’crease (verb) 
‘import “  im’port “ 
‘rebel   “  re’bel   “ 
‘convict “  con’vict “ 
‘extract “  ex’tract “ 
‘record  “  re’cord  “ 
‘subject “  sub’ject “ 
 
(b) Sentence Stress – Candidates should be aware that stress in sentences in English tends to 
occur at regular intervals in time. English is therefore called a stress-timed language. 
They should also be aware that in most sentences, unless some sort of emphasis is 
introduced, only nouns, main verbs (not auxiliaries), adjectives and adverbs are stressed. 
Final pronouns should not be stressed, unless some kind of contrast is intended: relative 
pronouns should not be stressed, nor should possessive pronouns. Thus, for example, the 
following sentences should be stressed as indicated: 
 
He ‘went to the town and ‘bought some ‘oranges. 
 
I ‘told him to ‘go to the ‘station to ‘ask when the train would ‘leave. 

10 
 
 
Did you ‘ask him? 
 
I ‘read it but I did not understand it. 
 
They ar’rived yesterday. 
 
I ‘fetched his ‘book. 
 
NOTE: There are a few words in English that are pronounced differently depending on 
whether or not they are stressed in the sentence. These are usually called strong 
and weak forms. 
 
(c) Emphatic stress – Candidates should be aware of the use of emphatic stress, most 
commonly to indicate a contrast, which is realized partly as a change in pitch within the 
intonational pattern. This falling pitch illustrated below is one of the common ways of 
indicating this: 
 
He borrowed ‘my newspaper. (i.e. not hers) 
He’ borrowed my newspaper. (i.e. he did not steal it) 
He borrowed my ‘newspaper.(i.e. not my book) 
‘He borrowed my newspaper.(i.e. not someone else’s) 
 
IV. INTONATION 
 
Candidates should be made aware of the different forms that English intonation takes in 
relation to the grammar of the language and the attitudes conveyed by the speaker. There 
are two basic intonation patterns or tunes: the falling and rising patterns. They should 
also realize that whereas the normal place for the changing pitch in an intonation is the 
last stressed syllable of the utterance(as indicated below), placing the changing pitch 
elsewhere implies a contrast to the item on which this changing pitch falls. For example: 
 
(a) Falling Pattern 
 
They ar’rived to’day.       -  Statement 
‘Where did he ‘go?   - WH question 
‘Come ‘here!  -  Command 
 
(b) Rising Pattern 
 
Did he ‘see the ‘principal? - Yes/No question 
When the ‘train arrived.    -  Incomplete 
They arrived to’day?  -     Question 
 
Note that (i)    the two patterns indicated above may be combined in longer sentences, e.g. 
  When the ‘train ar’rived, the passengers were on the platform. ( ) 

11 
 
 
(ii)    candidates should note, in addition, that any unstressed syllable following the last 
stressed syllable of the sentence is said on a low level pitch when the pattern is 
falling, but continues the rise if the pattern is rising. The same rule applies to tags 
following quoted speech. 
 
Test Of Orals (For candidates in Nigeria and Liberia)  
 
The test will also be of the multiple-choice objective type consisting of sixty questions on a wide 
range of areas or aspects of Orals as contained in the syllabus. 
 
The test will cover the following areas: 
 
1. Vowels – pure vowels and diphthongs; 
2. Consonants and clusters; 
3. Rhymes; 
4. Word stress/Syllable Structure; 
5. Emphatic Stress/Intonation Patterns; 
6. Phonetic Symbols.