

 
 
1 
 
 
 
 GEOGRAPHY 
 
PREAMBLE 
 
The  Geography  syllabus  is  designed  to  evaluate  candidates’  knowledge  of  the  features  of  the 
earth’s  crust  (internal and  external),  the  spatial spread  of  the  physical  and  human  features,  the 
interactions that exist between man and these spatial features, the changes that occur over space 
as  well  as  the  effects  of  those  changes  on  man  with  a  view  to  maintaining  sustainability  in 
man’s ecosystem. This examination syllabus is based on the assumption that not less than three 
hours of teaching per week will be allocated to the subject. 
 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES    
 
The examination will test the candidates’ ability to 
                   
(i) explain the concepts of differential character and the spatial relationships  
of the surface features of the earth;  
    
(ii) explain the concepts of  man- environment relations (i.e. to analyse the life of man 
within his physical and cultural environments and to explain their interactions); 
 
(iii) demonstrate a basic knowledge of the nature and functioning of physical and human 
environments, particularly an understanding of their inter-relationships and the resulting 
issues; 
 
(iv) organize and formulate principles according to acquired geographical concepts and then 
apply these principles to interpret and analyze spatial problems in the immediate and 
wider environments;  
 
(v) demonstrate skills and techniques for accurate, orderly and objective geographical 
investigations to be carried out both in the classrooms  and in the immediate 
environment; 
 
(vi) communicate geographical ideas effectively through reports, graphs, charts, sketches, 
diagrams and maps; 
 
(vii) explain the cultural, social and economic  circumstances of people in their immediate 
environments and those of other countries within the sub-region. 
 
SCHEME OF EXAMINATION  
 
There  will  be  three  papers,  Papers  1,  2  and  3  all  of  which  must  be  taken.  Papers  1  and  2  will  be  a 
composite paper to be taken at one sitting. 
 
PAPER 1: will  consist of fifty  objective  questions  to  be  taken in  1  hour for  50  marks.  The  questions 
will  be  drawn  from  topics  in  the  syllabus  that  are common  to  all  the  member  countries. 
Candidates will be required to attempt all the questions. 
 
PAPER 2:  will contain nine essay-type questions out of which candidates will be required to 
                 answer four in 2 hours for 80 marks. 

 
 
2 
 
 
 It  will  be  made  up  of  two  sections;  Sections  A  and  B  for  candidates  in  Nigeria  and  three 
sections;  Sections  A,  B  and  C  for  candidates  in  Ghana,  Liberia,  Sierra  Leone  and  The 
Gambia.  
 
Candidates  in  Nigeria  will  be  required  to  attempt  four  questions  in  all,  choosing  two 
questions  from  each  of  Sections  A  and  B.  Candidates  in  Ghana,  Liberia,  Sierra  Leone  and 
The Gambia will be required to attempt four questions in all, choosing at least one question 
from each of Sections A, B and C. 
 
The questions will be distributed in the sections as follows: 
   
                 Section A: Economic and Human Geography 
 
This  will  consist  of  three  essay-type  questions  on Economic  and  Human  Geography. 
Candidates in Nigeria will be required to attempt any two of them while candidates in Ghana, 
Liberia, Sierra Leone and The Gambia are to attempt at least one of the questions. 
 
 
               Section B: Regional Geography of Candidate’s Home Country 
 
There will be a set of three essay-type questions on Regional Geography on each of Ghana, 
Liberia,  Nigeria,  Sierra  Leone  and  The  Gambia.  Candidates  in  Nigeria  will  be  required  to 
answer two of the questions on their country while those in the other countries will answer at 
least one out of the sets for their countries.
 
 
               Section C: Regional Geography of Africa 
 
There will be three essay-type questions drawn from Africa for candidates in Ghana, Sierra 
Leone, Liberia and The Gambia out of which candidates are expected to answer at least one. 
 
 
PAPER 3:  Element of Practical and Physical Geography 
Will  consist  of  eight  essay-type  questions  out  of  which  candidates  are  to  answer  four  in  1 
hour  50  minutes  for  70  marks.  Question  1,  on  map  reading  and  interpretation,  will  be 
compulsory for all candidates and will carry 25 marks while the other questions will carry 15 
marks  each.    Candidates  are  advised not  to  spend  more  than  35  minutes  on  Question  1. 
Candidates will be expected to bring graduated rulers (both metric and imperial), a complete 
mathematical set, a piece of string and a simple non-programmable calculator for use during 
the writing of the paper. 
 
 
 
 
DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 
Any topic in the syllabus that is marked with one asterisk (*) will be for candidates in Ghana, 
Sierra Leone, Liberia and The Gambia. Topics that are marked with two asterisks (**) will be 
for candidates in Nigeria only. The topics without asterisk are for all member countries. 
 
                CONTENTS                                   NOTES 
   ELEMENTS OF 
PRACTICAL AND    
PHYSICAL    GEOGRAPHY 
   Map work                               
        
 
                                                                                                                                         
Maps: meaning, types and uses.                                                                                          

 
 
3 
 
                                                
                                                 
                                                 
                                                     
                                                    
                                                                    
                                               
                
                          
 
 
*Principles of elementary surveying                     
          
 
**Geographic Information System 
(GIS) 
 
 
 
 
 Statistical maps and diagrams      
                                                       
                                                       
                                     
Elements of Physical Geography  
 
 
 
*Hydrosphere 
       
        
 
           
 
(i) Rocks  
                              
(ii) Tectonic processes  
 
 
 
 
(iii) Denudational processes 
          
 
 
(iv) Weather and climate   
 
 
 
 
 
(v)  Climate 
(a) Elements 
 
 
 
Map reading and interpretation based on contoured survey 
maps of parts of West Africa: scale, measurement of 
distances, direction and bearing, map reduction and 
enlargement, identification of physical features such as spurs, 
valleys, etc. and cultural features such as city walls, 
settlements, communication routes, etc.; measurement of 
gradients, drawing of cross profiles, inter-visibility, 
description and explanation of drainage characteristics and 
pattern; patterns of communication, settlement and land use. 
 
Definitions of terms, instruments, chain and prismatic 
compass, plotting of traverse, avoiding obstacles in the field. 
 
 
GIS: Basic concepts, components (hardware, software, data, 
procedures and experts); sources of data (land surveying, 
remote sensing, map digitizing, map scanning, field 
investigation and tabular data etc); uses (defence, agriculture, 
urban development, mapping, surveying, transportation, 
census etc), problems (power, personnel, capital etc). 
 
Graphical representation of statistical data: Bar graphs, Line 
graphs, flow charts, dot maps, proportional circles, density 
maps, isopleth maps.       
           
The earth as a planet in relation to the sun,  latitude and 
distance, longitude and time, earth’s rotation and revolution 
and their e
ffects, structure of the earth (internal and external).                                                                      
   
Ocean basins, salinity, ocean current ( causes, types and their 
effects on the temperature of adjacent coastlands), lakes, 
rivers, lagoons, water as an environmental resource. 
 
                                                                                              
Types, characteristics, formation and uses.                           
                                                                                                                                                               
Vulcanicity, earthquake, landforms: Mountains,  plains, karsts 
and coastal landforms (formation, characteristics and 
importance). 
  
 
Agencies modifying landforms such as weathering, mass 
movement, running water, underground water, wind and 
waves. 
 
Simple weather study based on local observation, description 
of the Stevenson’s screen and uses of basic weather 
instruments e.g. rain gauge, thermometer, barometer, wind 
vane etc.    
 
 
 Rainfall, sunshine, air pressure, wind, humidity, temperature 
and cloud. Factors affecting climatic elements e.g. altitude, 
latitude, ocean currents, land and sea breezes, continentality, 
aspect.  Interpretation of climatic charts and data.           
 

 
 
4 
 
(b) Classification 
 
 
 
          **    (c ) Climate change 
 
 
*(vi) Vegetation 
 
 
 
 
 
*(vii)Soil 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii)The environment 
 
(a) Environmental 
resources           
 
 
(b) Environmental 
problems/ hazards  
 
(c)  Environmental     
conservation                                                                
Major types of climate (Hot climate – Equatorial, Tropical 
Continental, Desert; Temperate climate – warm and cool). 
Classification of climate based on Greek and Koppen.   
                                                                                                                                      
Meaning, causes, effects and remedies.  
           
 
Major types (Tropical Rainforest, cool/warm temperate 
woodland, Tropical Grassland); characteristics, distribution, 
factors affecting their distribution, plant   communities. 
Vegetation as an environmental resource. Conservation of 
vegetation resources. 
 
Definition, local types and characteristics. Factors and 
processes of soil formation, soil profile, importance to man 
and the effects of human activities on soil. Soil erosion and 
conservation. 
 
 
 
Meaning, classification ( renewable and non renewable) 
 types ( vegetation, water, mineral, atmospheric, etc ) and the 
importance of each.                         
                
Types (soil erosion, drought, desert encroachment, flooding 
and pollution), causes, effects and prevention of each.                 
 
Meaning, importance, methods, problems and solutions. 
 

 
 
5 
 
 
                CONTENTS                                   NOTES 
    
ECONOMIC AND HUMAN 
GEOGRAPHY   
 
(i) World Population 
 
 
(ii) Settlement               
 
 
 
 
(iii) Transportation   
 
 
 
 
        
 
(iv) Industry  
 
 
 
(v) Trade          
 
(vi) Tourism 
 
                                     
 
 
                                            
Factors and patterns of growth, distribution and movement, 
growth rate problems.  
 
Types (rural and urban); patterns and factors affecting 
location; growth and size; functions of rural and urban 
settlements; interaction patterns( urban-rural, rural-urban, 
urban-urban, rural-rural); migration. 
 
Modes (roads, railways, water, air, pipeline, cables, ropeways  
etc.) Transportation and economic development (movement 
of people and commodities, national and international trade, 
diffusion of ideas and technology, national integration); 
problems of transportation and their solutions.                                                                      
 
Classification (primary, secondary and tertiary); types (heavy 
and light industry); factors of industrial location; 
contributions to development; problems/solutions.            
 
Meaning, types (national and international), reasons for trade, 
importance. 
Meaning, centres, reasons (leisure, recreation, education etc ); 
importance, problems and solutions. 
 
ASPECTS OF REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY PECULIAR TO MEMBER COUNTRIES 
 
                CONTENTS                                   NOTES 
    
REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY OF 
NIGERIA 
 
(a) Nigeria on broad outline  
 
(b) Physical setting 
 
 
(c) Population 
 
 
(d) Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
Location, position, size, distance and political divisions. 
 
Relief, drainage, climate, vegetation 
 
 
Size, distribution, structure, population quality, population 
movement, population data ( sources and problems/solutions) 
 
Mineral (petroleum, gas, coal, tin/columbite, iron ore, 
limestone)- distribution, methods of extraction, problems and 
solutions) 
 
Power (Petroleum, gas, coal HEP, solar energy) 
 
 Water (rivers, lakes, dams, sea, underground water) 
 
 Vegetation (trees, food and cash crops; timber,etc)- forest, 
savanna, biosphere. 
 
Types of agricultural practices, food and cash crops, 
importance, problems and solutions. 

 
 
6 
 
 
(f) Transportation 
 
 
(g) Communication 
 
 
(h) Industry 
 
 
 
 
(i) Trade 
 
 
 
 
(j) Tourism 
 
 
 
 
(k) Issues on development and 
environmental concerns 
 
 
 
(l) ECOWAS 
 
 
 
 
(m) Geo-political issues 
 
 
REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY OF 
GHANA  
                                                 
 
(a) Ghana on broad outline 
 
(b) Physical setting 
 
 
(c) Population 
 
(d) Settlement 
 
 
 
(e) Primary economic activities 
 
(i) Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Fishing 
 
 
 
Mode, advantages and disadvantages, problems and 
solutions, influence of transportation on human activities. 
 
 Communication networks, advantages and disadvantages, 
importance, problems and solutions. 
 
Definition, types, major industrial zones, factors of location, 
importance, problems and solutions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meaning, types (national and international), stock exchange, 
capital market, forex, major commercial areas, importance of 
commercial activities. 
 
Meaning, centres, reasons for tourism, importance, problems 
and solutions. 
 
 
 
Issues of Development and Environmental Conservation: 
Rural and regional development, resource management and 
conservation, environmental pollution e.g. air, water, soil, 
noise; waste disposal, etc. 
 
 
 
 
Meaning, member countries, purposes/mandate, 
advantages/benefits, disadvantages, problems and solutions. 
 
 
 
Geo-political issues-Land reclamation. 
 
 
 
 
 
Location, position, size, distance and political divisions. 
 
Physical environment (geology, relief, drainage, climate, 
vegetation and soils).   
 
Size, growth, distribution and density, age/sex structure: 
fertility, morbidity and mortality, migration. 
 
 Origin, types (rural and urban), characteristics, hierarchy, 
land use, urbanization processes, problems and solutions. 
 
 
 
Subsistence (intensive and extensive) commercial (vegetable, 
livestock, dairying, commercial grain), plantation, problems 
and solutions. 
 
 
Inland and ocean (in-shore/off shore), methods, types of fish, 
storage and marketing, importance, problems and solutions. 
 
Sources of timber, methods of exploitation, types of species 

 
 
7 
 
(iii) Lumbering 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Mining 
 
 
 
(f) Manufacturing 
 
 
 
(g) Trade and commerce 
 
 
(h) Tourism 
 
 
(i) Energy and power 
                 
 
 
 
 
(i)   Issues on development 
and environmental 
concerns 
 
 
 
 
 
(for internal use and for export), problems and solutions, 
conservation. 
 
 
Types, distribution of minerals, methods of extraction,  
importance, problems and solutions. 
 
 
Types of manufacturing industries, distribution, factors 
influencing location of industries, problems of 
industrialization.  
 
 Services, transport and communication, recreation and 
tourism, administration.  
 
Meaning, centres, reasons for tourism, importance, problems 
and solutions. 
 
 Water (Akosombo and Kpong Hydro-electric Power projects 
– benefits and side effects), fuel wood and charcoal, 
petroleum and natural gas (Saltpond), solar, wave and wind 
energies (Donkokrom and Kokrobite), Biogas e.g. cow dung. 
 
 
Issues of Development and Environmental Conservation: 
Rural and regional development, resource management and 
conservation, environmental pollution e.g. air, water, soil, 
noise; waste disposal etc. 
 
 
 
 
REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY OF 
SIERRA  LEONE 
 
(a) Sierra Leone on broad 
outline 
 
(b) Primary economic activities 
 
(i)Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Fishing 
 
 
 
(iii) Lumbering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Size and location, physical environment, people and 
settlements.  
 
 
 
Meaning of agriculture, Subsistence (intensive and extensive) 
commercial (vegetable, livestock, dairying, commercial grain 
production),  plantation, problems and solutions. 
 
 
Meaning of fishing, Inland and ocean (in-shore/off shore), 
methods, types of fish, storage and marketing, importance, 
problems and solutions. 
 
Meaning of lumbering, Sources of timber, methods of 
exploitation, types of species (for internal use and for export), 
problems and solutions, conservation. 

 
 
8 
 
 
 
(iv) Mining 
 
 
(c) Manufacturing 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) Transport and  
communication 
 
 
(e ) Trade 
 
 
 
(f) Population 
 
 
 
(g) Tourism  
 
 
 
 
 
REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY OF 
LIBERIA 
 
(a) Liberia on broad outline  
 
(b) Physical setting 
 
(c) Population 
 
 
(d) Resources 
 
 
(e) Agriculture 
 
 
 
(f) Transportation 
 
 
 
(g) Communication 
 
 
(h) Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Types, distribution of minerals, methods of extraction, 
problems and solutions. 
 
Location of industry, types of industries, problems of 
manufacturing industry, Energy and Power, water, fuelwood 
and charcoal, biogas (e.g. cow-dung), hydro-electric power 
projects e.g. Dodo, Guma, Bumbuna. 
 
Road, rail, water, air, the roles of transport and 
communication to economic development,( internal and 
external trade, diffusion of ideas and technology), problems 
of transport and communication, solutions. 
 
Major commodities of trade (agricultural, manufactured 
goods, minerals, etc.), patterns of trade (internal and 
external), problems of trade. 
 
Size, growth, distribution and migration. 
 
 
Meaning, development of tourism, problems of tourism & 
solutions, socio-economic effects of tourism. Main tourism 
areas, factors responsible for its development, economic 
importance. 
 
 
 
 
 
Location, position, size, distance and political divisions. 
 
Relief, drainage, climate, vegetation and soil. 
 
Size, distribution, structure, population quality, population 
movement, population data ( sources, problems &  solutions) 
 
Mineral, power, water and vegetation resources, importance 
of resources to development. 
 
Types of agricultural practices, food and cash crops, 
importance, problems and solutions. 
 
 
Mode, advantages and disadvantages, problems and 
solutions, influence of transportation on human activities. 
 
 
Communication networks, advantages and disadvantages, 
importance, problems & solutions. 
 
Definition, types, major industrial zones, factors of location, 
importance, problems and solutions, importance. 
 
 
 
 
 
Meaning, types ( national and international), forex, major 

 
 
9 
 
(i) Trade 
 
 
(j) Tourism 
 
 
 
(k) Fishing 
 
 
 
(l) Mining 
 
 
REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY OF 
SENEGAMBIA 
 
(a) Senegambia on broad 
outline  
 
(b) Physical setting 
 
 
(c) Population 
 
 
(d) Resources 
 
 
(e) Agriculture 
 
 
(f) Transportation 
 
 
(g) Communication 
 
 
(h) Industry 
 
 
(i) Mining 
 
 
(j) Fishing 
 
 
 
 
(k) Issues on development and 
environmental concerns 
 
 
 
 
(l) Trade 
 
 
(m) Tourism 
 
commercial areas, importance of commercial activities. 
 
Meaning, centres, reasons for tourism, importance, problems 
and solutions. 
 
Meaning of fishing, Inland and ocean (in-shore/off shore), 
methods, types of fish, storage and marketing, importance, 
problems and solutions. 
 
Types, distribution of minerals, methods of extraction, 
problems and solutions. 
 
 
 
 
Location, position, size, distance and political divisions. 
 
 
 
Relief, drainage, climate, vegetation and soil. 
 
 
Size, distribution, structure, population quality, population 
movement, population data ( sources, problems &solutions) 
 
Mineral, power, water and vegetation resources, importance 
of resources to development. 
 
Types of agricultural practices, food and cash crops, 
importance, problems and solutions. 
 
Mode, advantages and disadvantages, influence of 
transportation on human activities, problems and solutions. 
 
Communication networks, advantages and disadvantages, 
importance, problems and solutions. 
 
Definition, types, major industrial zones, factors of location,  
importance, problems and solutions. 
 
 
Types, distribution, methods of extraction, problems and 
solutions 
 
Meaning of fishing, Inland and ocean (in-shore/off shore), 
methods, types of fish, storage and marketing, problems and 
solutions. 
 
Issues of Development and Environmental Conservation: 
Rural and regional development, resource management and 
conservation, environmental pollution e.g. air, water, soil, 
noise, waste disposal etc. 
 
 
 
 
Meaning, types (national and international), forex, major 
commercial areas, importance of commercial activities, 
problems and solutions. 
 
Meaning, centres, reasons for tourism, importance, problems 

 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY OF 
AFRICA 
 
(a) Africa on broad outline 
 
 
 
(b) Selected topics 
(i) Irrigation agriculture 
 
(ii) Plantation agriculture 
 
(iii) Oil production 
 
(iv) Lumbering 
 
 
 
(v) Gold Mining 
 
(vi)  Copper mining 
 
 
(vii) Population 
 
 
(viii) ECOWAS 
 
 
 
FIELD WORK 
 
and solutions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Location, size, position, political divisions and associated 
islands, physical features and their economic importance 
(relief, drainage, climate and vegetation), distribution of 
minerals. 
 
Irrigation agriculture in the Nile Basin and the Niger Basin. 
 
Plantation agriculture in West and East Africa. 
 
Oil production in Nigeria, Ghana and Libya. 
 
Lumbering in Equatorial Africa (with particular reference to 
Cote d’Ivoire and Zaire). 
Gold mining in South Africa. 
 
Copper mining in Zambia and Zaire 
 
Population distribution in West Africa. 
 
Meaning, member countries, purposes/mandate, 
advantages/benefits, disadvantages, problems and solutions. 
 
 
 
Fieldwork on any one of the following topics should be based 
on local geography of candidate’s home country.  (This 
aspect of the syllabus should be examined by schools as part 
of the continuous assessment and should account for 25% of 
the total mark allotted to continuous assessment).  
 
(i) Land use (rural or urban): 
rural – crop farming (e.g. rice, cocoa, etc. )  
urban crop farming 
mining (e.g. coal, tin, petroleum etc.), fishing. 
urban – commercial activities, ports, factories, 
recreational etc. 
(ii) Market survey – rural or urban. 
(iii) Traffic flow – rural or urban. 
(iv) Patterns of journey to work – rural or urban.  
(v) Rate of erosion in the locality, etc. 
 
 
 

 
 
11 
 
SUGGESTED READING LIST 
 
S/N          AUTHOR                    TITLE  PUBLISHER 
   
  1. 
 
 
  2. 
 
 
  3. 
 
 
  4. 
 
  5. 
 
  
  6. 
 
  7. 
 
 
  8. 
 
 
  9. 
 
10. 
 
 
11. 
 
 
12. 
 
13. 
 
14. 
 
15. 
 
16. 
 
17. 
 
  
R. B. BUNNETT & P.O. OKUNROTIFA 
 
 
B. O. AKINDELE & G. C. LEONG 
 
 
STRAHLER, A. N. 
 
 
MONKHOUSE, F. J. 
 
UDO, REUBEN K. 
 
 
UDO, REUBEN K. 
 
N. P. ILOEJE 
 
 
M. A. ABEGUNDE et al 
 
 
DICKSON K. B. & BENNEH G. 
 
DICKSON & ACHEAMPONG 
 
 
OBOLI, H.O.N. 
 
 
J. I. CLARKE 
 
GWYN-JONES 
 
PRITCHARD, J. M. 
 
M. DUZE & AFOLABI OJO 
   
COLLINS 
 
PHILIPS 
 
 
General Geography in Diagram for 
West Africa. 
 
Certificate Physical and Human 
Geography (West African Edition). 
 
Introduction to Physical 
Geography.
 
 
Principles of Physical Geography. 
 
Comprehensive Geography of 
Tropical Africa. 
 
Geographical Regions of Nigeria. 
 
A new Geography of Nigeria (New 
Edition). 
 
Senior Secondary Geography Series 
(1-3) 
 
 
New Geography of Ghana. 
 
Geography for Senior Secondary 
Schools in Ghana. 
 
An outline Geography of West 
Africa. 
 
Sierra Leone in Maps. 
 
A New Geography of Sierra Leone. 
 
Africa. 
 
Macmillan Senior School Atlas. 
 
New Secondary School Atlas. 
 
World Atlas. 
 
Longman Dictionary of Geography 
 
Longman 
 
 
Oxford 
 
 
Wiley International Ed. 
 
 
University of London 
 
Longman 
 
 
Longman 
 
Longman 
 
 
Longman 
 
 
Ghana University Press 
 
Ghana Education Service 
 
 
Harrap & Company 
 
 
Hodder & Stoughton 
 
Hodder & Stoughton 
 
Longman 
 
Macmillan 
 
Longman 
 
 
 

 
 
12 
 
18. 
 
 
19. 
 
20. 
 
 
 
 
21. 
 
 
22. 
CLARY AUDREY N. 
  
 
 MOORE, W. E. 
 
N. P. ILOEJE, P.C. ONOKALA & F.O. 
ODEMERHO 
 
 
 
MACMILLAN 
 
 
Guiness, P. & Nagle, G.  
(Human and Physical). 
 
A Penguin Dictionary of geography 
 
Basic Geography Course for Senior 
Secondary Schools Books 1-3. 
 
 
Macmillan Senior School Atlas for 
Liberia Schools.
 
 
IGCSE Geography 
Longman 
 
 
 
 
Longman 
 
 
 
Macmillan 
 
 
Hodder Education, UK 
 