WASSCE / WAEC INTEGRATED SCIENCE TEACHING SYLLABUS 
WWW.LARNEDU.COM 
SOURCE: GHANA 
Enquiries and comments on this syllabus should be addressed to: 
The Director 
Curriculum Research and Development Division (CRDD) 
Ghana Education Service (GES) 
P.O. Box 2739 
Accra, Ghana. 
September, 2010 
i 

TEACHING SYLLABUS FOR INTEGRATED SCIENCE (SHS) 
RATIONALE FOR TEACHING INTEGRATED SCIENCE 
We are confronted daily with situations that require us to use scientific information to make informed choices and decisions at every turn. Modern life also requires 
general scientific literacy for every Ghanaian citizen. This is the only way by which the country can create a scientific culture toward achieving the country‟s 
strategic programme of scientific and technological literacy in the shortest possible time. Every citizen of the country needs training in science to be able to develop 
a scientific mind and a scientific culture. This is the only way by which people of the country could deal objectively with phenomena and other practical issues; 
prevent reliance on superstition for explaining the nature of things and help us to construct and build the present and the future on pragmatic scientific basis. Our 
humanistic past has been valuable, but cannot help much to usher the country into the age of science, invention and rapid economic development. The study of 
Science helps us to understand the natural world and secondly helps us to approach challenges in life and in the workplace in a systematic and logical manner. 
Development in the current world is knowledge based on science and technology. We gain knowledge faster through the use of science and technology. More 
knowledge helps nations to advance faster on the road to increased development and progress. For the country to develop faster, it is important for students to be 
trained in the processes of seeking answers to problems through scientific investigations and experimentation. The integrated science syllabus is a conscious 
effort to raise the level of scientific literacy of all students and equip them with the relevant basic scientific knowledge needed for their own living and secondly, 
needed for making valuable contributions to production in the country. Education in science also provides excellent opportunities for the development of positive 
attitudes and values in our youth. These include: 
Curiosity to explore their environment and question what they find 
Keenness to identify and answer questions through scientific investigations 
Creativity in suggesting new and relevant ways to solve problems 
Open-mindedness to accept all knowledge as tentative and to change their view if the evidence is convincing 
Perseverance and patience in pursuing a problem until a satisfying solution is found 
Concern for living things and awareness of their responsibility toward maintaining the quality of the environment 
Honesty, truthfulness and accuracy in recording and reporting scientific information 
Love, respect and appreciation for nature and desire to conserve natural balance. 
GENERAL AIMS 
The syllabus is designed to help the student to: 
1.solve basic problems within his/her immediate environment through analysis and experimentation 
2.keep a proper balance of the diversity of the living and non-living things based on their interconnectedness and repeated patterns of change. 
3.adopt sustainable habits for managing the natural environment for humankind and society 
4.use appliances and gadgets effectively with clear understanding of their basic principles and underlying operations 
5.explore, conserve and optimize the use of energy as an important resource for the living world 
6.adopt a scientific way of life based on pragmatic observation and investigation of phenomena. 
7.search for solutions to the problems of life recognizing the interaction of science, technology and other disciplines. 
ii 

SCOPE OF CONTENT 
The content of the Senior High School Integrated Science syllabus covers the basic sciences and includes topics in Health, Agriculture and Industry. The course 
has been designed to offer a body of knowledge and skills to meet the requirements of everyday living and also provide adequate foundation for the study of other 
subjects and for those who wish to pursue further education and training in science related vocations. 
Specific issues covered are the following: 
1.Science for all students 
2.Science as an active inquiry process 
3.Science and the satisfaction of individual needs 
4.Science as a profession 
5.Science and culture. 
The approach in this revised syllabus is based on themes that students can relate to in their everyday experiences, and to commonly observed phenomena in 
nature. The basic aim is to enable students to appreciate the links between seemingly different scientific topics and hence help them to be able to integrate ideas 
from various scientific sources. The five themes chosen for this subject are: Diversity of matter, Cycles, Systems, Energy and Interactions These themes 
encompass a core body of concepts in both the life and physical sciences. This body of concepts has been chosen because it provides a broad based 
understanding of the environment, and will help build a foundation upon which students can rely for further study. In particular, the relationships between Science 
and Technology and the environment are explored under the theme of Interactions. 
Although the content of the syllabus is organized into five themes, the topics under each theme should not be viewed as separate blocks of knowledge. In general, 
there are no clear boundaries between these themes. There may be topics common to different themes. Hence, the teacher should make a conscious effort to 
demonstrate the relationship between themes whenever possible for students to understand such relationship. It should be noted in particular that Systems, 
Energy and Interactions are closely related. 
Another feature of the syllabus is the spiral approach. This is characterized by revisiting concepts and skills at different levels with increasing degrees of depth. 
The spiral approach allows the learning of scientific concepts and skills to be matched to students‟ cognitive development to facilitate gradual mastery of skills. 
ORGANIZATION OF THE SYLLABUS 
The syllabus covers three year period of Senior High School Education. Each year‟s work embraces the five themes which are: Diversity of Matter, Cycles, 
Systems, Energy and Interaction of Matter. The five themes form the five sections of the syllabus for each of the three years‟ work. Details of the coverage of 
the themes are as follows: 
Section 1 - Diversity of Matter 
Our world has great biological, physical and geological diversity. The study of diversity should enable students to appreciate that there is a great variety of living 
and non-living things around us and in the world in which we live. They will also recognize that there are common threads that connect all living things and there 
are unifying factors in the diversity of non-living things that help to classify them. The study of diversity will allow students to appreciate importance of diversity and 
the necessity of maintaining it. They will also come to realize that interconnectedness among living and non living things are necessary to create harmony in 
nature. 
iii 

Section 2 – Cycles 
The study of cycles should enable students to recognize that there are repeated patterns of change in nature and understand how these patterns arise. Examples 
of these cycles include the day and night cycle, life cycles of living things and the recycling of resources. Studying these cycles helps humans to predict events 
and processes and to understand the Earth as a self-sustaining system. 
Section 3 - Systems 
The study of systems should enable students to recognize that a system is a whole consisting of parts that work together to perform a function. There are natural 
and artificial systems. Examples of systems in nature are the digestive and respiratory systems. Examples of artificial systems are electrical systems. A study of 
these systems allows humans to understand how they operate and how different parts influence and interact with one another to perform a function vital for life. 
Section 4 – Energy 
The study of energy should enable students to appreciate that energy affects both living and non-living things. It makes change and movement possible in 
everyday life. There are many forms of energy and one form can be converted to another. Humans use energy in many ways and for many different purposes. 
Humans are not the only living things that use energy. All living things obtain energy and use it to carry out life processes. The study of this theme will allow 
students to appreciate the importance and uses of energy and the need to explore and conserve it. 
Section 5 – Interactions of Matter 
The study of interactions should enable students to appreciate that the interactions between and within systems helps humans to better understand the 
environment and their role in it. There are many types of interactions. There are interactions between the living world and the environment at various levels; i.e. 
interactions which occur within an organism, between organisms as well as between organisms and the environment. There are also interactions between forces 
and objects. At the societal level, the interaction of humans with the environment drives the development of Science and Technology. At the same time, Science 
and Technology influences the way humans interact with their environment. By studying the interactions between humans and the environment, students can 
better appreciate the consequences of their actions. 
The structure and organization of the syllabus for the three year Senior High School is presented on the next page. 
iv 

STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION OF THE SYLLABUS 
SECTIONS 
DIVERSITY OF 
MATTER 
SHS1 
Unit 1: Introduction to Integrated Science. 
        (p. 1-2) 
Unit 2: Measurement (p. 2-3) 
Unit 3: Diversity of living and non-living 
        things. (p. 3-4) 
Unit 4: Matter (p. 4-5) 
Unit 5: Cells and cell division (p.6) 
Unit 6: Rocks (p.6) 
Unit 1: Air movement (p.7) 
Unit 2: Nitrogen cycle (p.8) 
SHS2 
Unit 1: Acids, Bases and Salts 
        (p. 21-22) 
Unit 2: Soil conservation (p. 22-23) 
Unit 3: Water (p. 24) 
SHS3 
Unit1: Metals and Non Metals 
        (p. 41) 
Unit 2: Exploitation of minerals 
        (p. 41) 
Unit 3: Rusting (p. 42) 
Unit 4: Organic And Inorganic 
Compounds(pg.43) 
CYCLES 
Unit 1: Hydrological Cycle (p.25-26) 
Unit 2: General principles of farm animal 
        production (pg. 26). 
Unit 1: Life Cycles of Pests and 
        parasites (p. 44) 
Unit 2: Crop Production (p.45) 
SYSTEMS 
Unit 1: Skeletal System (p.9) 
Unit 2: Reproduction and growth in Plants 
        (p. 9-11) 
Unit 3: Respiratory System (p.11-12) 
Unit 4: Food and Nutrition (p.13) 
Unit 5: Dentition, Feeding and Digestion 
        in mammals (p.13) 
Unit 6: Transport-Diffusion, Osmosis and 
        Plasmolysis (p.14) 
Unit 1: Forms of Energy and Energy 
        Transformation (p.15 
Unit 2: Solar Energy (p.16) 
Unit 3: Photosynthesis (17) 
Unit 4: Electronics (p.17) 
Unit 1: Excretory system (p.27) 
Unit 2: Reproductive Systems and growth in 
        mammals (p.27-29) 
Unit 3: Circulatory System (p.29) 
Unit 1: The Nervous System 
        (p.46) 
ENERGY 
Unit 1: Electrical Energy(p.30-31) 
Unit 2: Electronics.(p.32) 
Unit 3: Sound Energy(32-33) 
Unit 4: Nuclear Energy(pg.33) 
Unit 1: Light Energy (p.48) 
Unit 2: Heat Energy (p.49) 
Unit 3: Electronics (p.50) 
INTERACTIONS 
OF MATTER 
Unit 1: Ecosystem (p.18-19 
Unit 2: Atmosphere and Climate Change 
        (p.19-20) 
Unit 3: Infections and diseases (p.20) 
Unit 1: Magnetism (p.34) 
Unit 2: Forces, Motion and pressure (p.35-36) 
Unit 3: Safety in the Community (p.37-38) 
Unit 4: Endogenous Technology (pg.38-39) 
Unit 5: Biotechnology (pg.39-40) 
Unit 6: Work and Machines(pg. 40) 
Unit 1: Variation and 
        inheritance (p.51) 
v 

PRE-REQUISITE SKILLS AND ALLIED SUBJECTS 
Average performance in Science and Mathematics at Basic Stages 1 – 9 is necessary for success in this course. Students offering this course should also be 
concurrently studying Senior High School Core Mathematics and English language 
SUGGESTED TIME ALLOCATION 
A total of five periods a week, each period consisting of forty minutes, is allocated to the teaching of Integrated Science. The time allocation and the recommended 
structure for theory and practical are as follows: 
Year 1: 5 periods a week: Theory - 3 periods per week; Practical - Two continuous periods per week 
Year 2: 5 periods a week: Theory –3 periods per week; Practical - Two continuous periods per week 
Year 3: 5 periods a week: Theory –3 periods per week; Practical - Two continuous periods per week 
SUGGESTIONS FOR TEACHING THE SYLLABUS 
For effective teaching and learning in this course, it is recommended that schools should keep farms for growing crops. It is also recommended that farm animals 
in at least one of each of the following groups must be reared. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Chickens/ducks/turkeys 
Goats/sheep/cattle 
Rabbits and Guinea Pigs 
Plans must be made for visiting well established experimental and commercial farms, research institutes, and other institutions/organizations related to Science, 
Health and Agriculture. Visits must also be planned to scientific and manufacturing industries where students will observe scientific work and the application of 
science and technology in manufacturing. Video clips, digitized content or CD ROM on processes and systems could also be shown where these are available. 
Schools must adopt a team teaching approach for this course since many science teachers of the moment are trained as physicists, biologists, chemists, 
agriculturists etc. This deficiency will be remedied in the future if the universities start programmes in integrated science from where a new crop of integrated 
science teachers will be drawn. In the meantime, teachers are encouraged to tap the abilities of their colleagues in agriculture and in other science fields for the 
effective teaching of this course. 
General Objectives 
General Objectives have been listed at the beginning of each section of the syllabus, that is, just below the theme of the section. The general objectives are linked 
the general aims for teaching natural science listed on page (ii) of this syllabus. The general objectives specify the skills and behaviours the student should acquire 
after learning the units of a section and they form the basis for the selection and organization of the themes and their unit topics. Read the general objectives very 
carefully before you start teaching. After teaching all the units, go back and read the general aims and general objectives again to be sure you have covered both 
of them adequately in the course of your teaching. 
vi 

Years and Units 
The syllabus has been planned on the basis of Years and Units. Each year's work is covered in a number of units sequentially arranged and in a meaningful 
manner such that each unit‟s work will provide the necessary and enabling skills for the next unit. A description of the contents of each column is as follows: 
Syllabus Structure 
The syllabus is structured in five columns: Units, Specific Objectives, Content, Teaching and Learning Activities and Evaluation. A description of the contents of 
each column is as follows: 
Column 1 - Units: The units in column 1 are the major topics of the year. You are expected to follow the unit topics according to the linear order in which they 
have been presented. However, if you find at some point that teaching and learning in your class will be more effective if you branched to another unit before 
coming back to the unit in the sequence, you are encouraged to do so. 
Column 2 - Specific Objectives: Column 2 shows the Specific Objectives for each unit. The specific objectives begin with numbers such as 1.2.5 or 3.4.1. 
These numbers are referred to as "Syllabus Reference Numbers". The first digit in the syllabus reference number refers to the section; the second digit refers to 
the unit, while the third refer to the rank order of the specific objective. For instance 1.2.5 means section 1, Unit 2 and Specific Objective 5. In other words 1.2.5 
refers to Specific Objective 5 of Unit 2 of section 1. Similarly, the syllabus reference number 3.4.1 simply means Syllabus Objective number 1 of Unit 4 of section 
3. Using syllabus reference numbers provide an easy way for communication among teachers and educators. It further provides an easy way for selecting 
objectives for test construction. For instance, if Unit 4 of section 3 has seven specific objectives 3.4.1 - 3.4.7, a teacher may want to base his/her test 
items/questions on objectives 3.4.4 to 3.4.7 and not use the other first three objectives. In this way, a teacher would sample the objectives within units to be able 
to develop a test that accurately reflects the importance of the various specific objectives and skills taught in class. 
You will note also that specific objectives have been stated in terms of the student i.e. what the pupil will be able to do during and after instruction and learning in 
the unit. Each specific objective hence starts with the following "The student will be able to” This in effect, means that you have to address the learning problems of 
each individual student. It means individualizing your instruction as much as possible such that the majority of students will be able to master the objectives of 
each unit of the syllabus. The teaching of Natural Science should be activity-oriented for two important reasons. The activity approach challenges the children to 
develop their own ideas, and secondly makes the subject more meaningful and relevant to them. 
As has been said already, the order in which the topics appear should not necessarily be the teaching order. There should however, be a linkage in the order in 
which the units and specific objectives are treated. The teacher will have to study the syllabus carefully and plan ahead the activities the students will carry out 
during a particular period. Knowing the requirements of a particular lesson, the teacher should assemble the materials which will be required for the activities well 
in advance. The collection must be done by both the teacher and the students. Other materials like bottles, cans, match boxes, etc. may be continually collected 
and stored to be used when required. When materials are not available in the immediate environment, the teacher should try to contact resource persons or 
persons in higher institutions for help. 
As students begin work on the activities of each lesson, the teacher should serve as a facilitator and motivate the students in various ways to sustain their interest. 
The teacher should pay particular attention to children‟s questions and should also ask questions that will guide them to other areas of useful investigation. During 
the last ten minutes of the class activity, all students should come together to discuss their observations. The teacher must involve all students in the discussion. 
Column 3 - Content: The "content" in the third column of the syllabus presents a selected body of information that you will need to use in teaching the particular 
unit. In some cases, the content presented is quite exhaustive. In some other cases, you could add some more information based upon your own training and 
based also on current knowledge and information. 
vii 

Column 4 - Teaching/Learning Activities (T/LA): T/LA that will ensure maximum student participation in the lessons is presented in Column 4. The General 
Aims of the subject can only be most effectively achieved when teachers create learning situations and provide guided opportunities for students to acquire as 
much knowledge and understanding of science as possible through their own activities. Students' questions are as important as teacher's questions. There are 
times when the teacher must show, demonstrate, and explain. But the major part of a student‟s learning experience should consist of opportunities to explore 
various scientific situations in their environment to enable them make their own observations and discoveries and record them. Teachers should help students to 
learn to compare, classify, analyze, look for patterns, spot relationships and come to their own conclusions/deductions. Avoid rote learning and drill-oriented 
methods and rather emphasize participatory teaching and learning in your lessons. You are encouraged to re-order the suggested teaching/learning activities and 
also add to them where necessary in order to achieve optimum student learning. 
A suggestion that will help your students acquire the capacity for analytical thinking and the capacity for applying their knowledge to problems and issues is to 
begin each lesson with a practical problem. Select a practical problem for each lesson. The selection must be made such that pupils can use knowledge gained 
in the previous lesson and other types of information not specifically taught in class. The learning of any skill considered important must start early. Engage your 
students in analytical thinking and practical scientific problem solving techniques. 
Column 5 - Evaluation: Suggestions and exercises for evaluating the lessons of each unit are indicated in Column 5. Evaluation exercises can be in the form of 
oral questions, quizzes, class assignments, essays, project work, etc. Try to ask questions and set tasks and assignments, etc. that will challenge students to 
apply their knowledge to issues and problems as has already been said, and that will engage them in developing solutions, and in developing observational and 
investigative skills as a result of having undergone instruction in this subject. The suggested evaluation tasks are not exhaustive. You are encouraged to develop 
other creative evaluation tasks to ensure that students have mastered the instruction and behaviours implied in the specific objectives of each unit. 
Lastly, bear in mind that the syllabus cannot be taken as a substitute for lesson plans. It is necessary that you develop a scheme of work and lesson plans for 
teaching the units of this syllabus. 
DEFINITION OF PROFILE DIMENSIONS 
A 'dimension' is a psychological unit for describing a particular learning behaviour. More than one dimension constitutes a profile of dimensions. A specific 
objective may be stated with an action verb as follows: The pupil will be able to describe etc. Being able to "describe" something after the instruction has been 
completed means that the pupil has acquired "knowledge". Being able to explain, summarize, give examples, etc. means that the pupil has understood the lesson 
taught. Similarly, being able to develop, plan, solve problems, construct, etc. means that the student has learnt to create, innovate or synthesize knowledge. Each 
of the specific objectives in this syllabus contains an "action verb" that describes the behaviour the pupil will be able to demonstrate after the instruction. " 
Applying Knowledge", ", etc. are dimensions that should be the prime focus of teaching and learning in schools. It has been realized unfortunately that schools still 
teach the low ability thinking skills of Remembering and understanding and ignore the higher ability thinking skills. Instruction in most cases has tended to stress 
knowledge acquisition to the detriment of the higher ability behaviours such as application, analysis, etc. The persistence of this situation in the school system 
means that pupils will only do well on recall items and questions and perform poorly on questions that require higher ability thinking skills such as application of 
mathematical principles and problem solving. For there to be any change in the quality of people who go through the school system, pupils should be encouraged 
to apply their knowledge, develop analytical thinking skills, develop plans, generate new and creative ideas and solutions, and use their knowledge in a variety of 
ways to solve mathematical problems while still in school. Each action verb indicates the underlying profile dimension of each particular specific objective. Read 
each objective carefully to know the profile dimension toward which you have to teach. 
The dimensions for teaching, learning and testing in Integrated Science at SHS and their respective weights are as follows: 
Remembering and Understanding 
Applying Knowledge 
Practical and Experimental Skills 
20% 
40% 
40% 
viii 

Each of the dimensions has been given a percentage weight that should be reflected in teaching, learning and testing. The weights indicated on the right of the 
dimensions show the relative emphasis that the teacher should give in the teaching, learning and testing. You will notice that “Applying knowledge” and “Practical 
and Experimental Skills” have equal weight that is higher than the weight for “Knowledge and Comprehension”. This means that the second and third dimensions 
are considered more important and will therefore need more emphasis in the teaching and testing system. 
The explanation and key words in each of the profile dimensions are indicated below. 
Remembering and Understanding (RU) 
Knowledge The ability to: 
Recognize, retrieve, locate, find, do bullet pointing, highlight, bookmark, network socially, bookmark socially, search, google, favourite, 
recall, identify, define, describe, list, name, match, state principles, facts and concepts. Knowledge is simply the ability to remember or 
recall material already learned and constitutes the lowest level of learning. 
Understanding 
The ability to: 
Interpret, explain, infer, compare, explain, exemplify, do advanced searches, categorize, comment, twitter, tag, annotate, subscribe, 
summarize, translate, rewrite, paraphrase, give examples, generalize, estimate or predict consequences based upon a trend. 
Understanding is generally the ability to grasp the meaning of some material that may be verbal, pictorial, or symbolic. 
Applying Knowledge (AK) 
The ability to use knowledge or apply knowledge, as implied in this syllabus, has a number of learning/behaviour levels. These levels include application, analysis, 
innovation or creativity, and evaluation. These may be considered and taught separately, paying attention to reflect each of them equally in your teaching. The 
dimension “Applying Knowledge” is a summary dimension for all four learning levels. Details of each of the four sub levels are as follows: 
Application The ability to: 
Apply rules, methods, principles, theories, etc. to concrete situations that are new and unfamiliar. It also involves the ability to produce, 
solve, operate, demonstrate, discover, implement, carry out, use, execute, run, load, play, hack, upload, share, edit etc. 
The ability to: 
Break down a piece of material into its component parts, to differentiate, compare, deconstruct, attribute, outline, find, structure, integrate, 
mash, link, validate, crack, distinguish, separate, identify significant points etc., recognize unstated assumptions and logical fallacies, 
recognize inferences from facts etc. Analytical ability underlies discriminate thinking. 
The ability to: 
Put parts together to form a new whole, a novel, coherent whole or make an original product. It involves the ability to synthesize, combine, 
compile, compose, devise, construct, plan, produce, invent, devise, make, program, film, animate, mix, re-mix, publish, video cast, 
podcast, direct, broadcast, suggest (an idea, possible ways), revise, design, organize, create, and generate new ideas and solutions. The 
ability to create or innovate is the highest form of learning. The world becomes more comfortable because some people, based on their 
learning, generate new ideas, design and create new things. 
Analyzing 
Innovation/Creativity 
ix 

Evaluating The ability to: 
Appraise, compare features of different things and make comments or judgement, contrast, critique, justify, hypothesize, experiment, test, 
detect, monitor, review, post, moderate, collaborate, network, refractor, support, discuss, conclude, make recommendations etc. 
Evaluation refers to the ability to judge the worth or value of some material based on some criteria and standards. We generally compare, 
appraise and select throughout the day. Every decision we make involves evaluation. Evaluation is a high level ability just as application, 
analysis and innovation or creativity since it goes beyond simple knowledge acquisition and understanding. 
The action verbs and the definitions provided in the explanations of the three profile dimensions should help you to structure your teaching such as to achieve the 
effects needed. Select from the action verbs provided for your teaching, in evaluating learning before, during and after the instruction. Use the action verbs also in 
writing your test questions. This will ensure that you give your students the chance to develop good thinking skills, and the capacity for excellent performance in 
integrated science and in examinations. Check the weights of the profile dimensions to ensure that you have given the required emphasis to each of the 
dimensions in your teaching and assessment. 
Experimental and Process Skills (EPS) 
Experimental skills involve the enquiry/investigative process of planning and designing experiments, carrying out case studies and field studies to be able to 
compare phenomena or to observe phenomena closely to be able to identify causes and reasons for the occurrence of phenomena and develop practical solutions 
to problems and tasks. 
Process skills involve demonstration of practical manipulative skills using tools, machines and equipment for problem solving in science. Process skills also involve 
the processes of observation, classification, drawing, measurement, interpretation, recording, reporting, and expected scientific conduct in the laboratory/field. 
A summary of the skills required for effective practical and experimental work are the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
Equipment Handling 
Planning and designing of experiments 
Observation 
Manipulation 
Classification 
Drawing 
Designing 
Measuring 
Interpretation 
Recording 
Reporting 
Conduct in Laboratory/Field 
x 

A summary of the skills required for effective experimental and practical work are the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
i 
Equipment Handling 
Planning and designing of experiments 
Observation 
Manipulation 
Classification 
Drawing 
Designing 
Measuring 
Interpretation 
Recording 
Reporting 
Conduct in Laboratory/Field 
Equipment Handling: 
Proper handling and use of tools and equipment for practical and experimental work; The teacher would ensure that students acquire a high level of 
proficiency in the use of tools and equipment for scientific work. 
Planning and designing of Experiments: 
 Development of hypotheses; planning and designing of experiments; persistence in the execution of experimental activities; modification of experimental 
activities where necessary in order to reach conclusions. 
ii. 
Research evidence shows that when confronted with a problem, scientists who excel in their respective fields of work develop a number of hypotheses within a 
short time, review and criticize each hypothesis and then select the best one. Weaker scientists on the other hand, tend to focus on only one or two hypotheses. 
The implication of this for the teacher of integrated science is to lead students to learn to generate a number of hypotheses for every problem tackled in class; 
criticize each hypothesis generated before selecting the best one. Some of the critical characteristics to encourage in pupils are: 
 
 
 
 
iii. 
Hypotheses generation, 
Ability to modify and change procedures when difficulties arise, 
Creativity, 
Persistence 
Observation: 
Use of the senses to make accurate observations; The student for instance, should be able to tell the colour, form, texture and the structure of specimens 
provided and be able to classify them. 
Manipulation: 
Manipulation involves the skillful handling of scientific objects and tools for accomplishing specific tasks. It involves setting up laboratory apparatus, 
preparing specimens and other material for observation. 
Classification: 
Group specimens and objects according to their common properties or characteristics. 
iv. 
v. 
xi 

vi. Drawing: 
Draw clearly and label specimens, objects etc. 
Designing: 
Visualize and draw new objects or gargets from imagination, etc. 
Measuring: 
Refers to the accurate use of measuring instruments and equipment for measuring, reading and making observations. 
Interpretation: 
The ability to 
(i)evaluate data in terms of its worth: good, bad, reliable, unreliable etc. 
(ii)make inferences and predictions from written or graphical data 
(iii)extrapolate 
(iv)derive conclusions 
Recording: 
Draw or make graphical representation boldly and clearly, well labelled and pertinent to the issue at hand. 
Reporting: 
Students should be able to present pertinent and precise reports on projects they undertake. Reports, oral or written, should be concise, clear and 
accurate. 
Generalizing 
Being able to use the conclusions arrived at in an experiment to what could happen in similar situations 
Conduct in Laboratory/Field: 
Observation of safety measures in the laboratory; care and concern for the safety of one‟s self and for others; ability to work alone and with others; good 
co-operative spirit, economical use of materials; maintenance of clean and orderly work area; persistence in achieving results; creative use of materials 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
FORM OF ASSESSMENT 
It must be emphasized that both instruction and assessment be based on the profile dimensions of the subject. In developing assessment procedures, select 
specific objectives in such a way that you will be able to assess a representative sample of the syllabus objectives. Each specific objective in the syllabus is 
considered a criterion to be achieved by the student. When you develop a test that consists of items or questions that are based on a representative sample of the 
specific objectives taught, the test is referred to as a “Criterion-Referenced Test” In many cases, a teacher cannot test all the objectives taught in a term, in a year 
etc. The assessment mode you use i.e. class tests, homework, projects etc. must be developed in such a way that it will consist of a representative sample of the 
important objectives taught over a period. 
End of Senior High School Examination 
The Senior High School Examination consists of three papers, Paper 1, Paper 2, Paper 3 and the SBA. Paper 1 will usually be an objective – type test paper. 
Paper 2 will consist of structured questions or essay questions, essentially testing „Application of Knowledge”, but also consisting of some questions on 
„Knowledge and Understanding‟. Paper 3 will be the practical test paper. School Based Assessment (SBA) will be based on all three dimensions as indicated. 
The distribution of marks for the objectives test items, essay type questions and the practical questions in the three papers and in the SBA should be in line with 
the weight of the profile dimensions already indicated and as shown in the last column of the table 1. 
xii 

The West African Examinations Council (WAEC) generally sets about 60 objective test items at the final examination. Emulate this by developing an objective test 
paper (Paper 1) that consists of 60 items. Paper 2 could consist of some structured questions and essay questions. In general, let students answer five essay 
questions from a list of 7-10 questions. Paper 3 will consist of 5-7 practical questions. 
In the examination structure presented in the Table 1, Paper 1 is marked out of 60; Paper 2 is marked out of 90, Paper 3 marked out of 60, and School Based 
Assessment is marked out of 90, giving a total of 300 marks. The last row shows the weight of the marks allocated to each of the four test components. The three 
papers are weighted differently. Paper 2 is a more intellectually demanding paper and is therefore weighted more than Papers 1 and 3. 
DIMENSIONS 
    Distribution of Examination Paper Weights and Marks 
                                               TOTAL 
PAPER 1PAPERPAPER 3SBAMARKS 
           2 
% WEIGHT 
OF 
DIMENSIO 
N 
20 Remembering and 
Understanding 
Applying 
Knowledge 
Experimental and 
Process Skills 
Total Marks 
30 20 - 10 60 
30 70 - 20 120 40 
- - 60 60 120 40 
60 90 60 90 300 
% Contribution of 
Papers 
10 25 15 50 100 
You will note that Paper 1 has a contribution of 10% to the total marks; Paper 2 has a contribution of 25% to the total marks; Paper 3 has a contribution of 15%, 
and SBA has a contribution of 50% to the total marks. The SBA marks should be appropriately scaled down to 30%. The numbers in the cells indicate the marks to 
be allocated to the items/questions that test each of the dimensions within the respective test papers. 
The last but one column shows the total marks allocated to each of the dimensions. Note that the numbers in this column are additions of the numbers in the cells 
and they agree with the profile dimension weights indicated in the last column. 
Of the total marks of 300, 60 marks, equivalent to 20% of the total marks, are allocated to Knowledge and Comprehension. 120 marks, equivalent to 40% of the 
total marks, are allocated to each of Application of Knowledge and Process / Experimental Skills. The weight of each of the three dimensions is indicated in the last 
column. The ratio of theory to practice in integrated science is 60:40. 
xiii 

Test Item bank 
The structure of assessment recommended in the syllabus will need extra effort on the part of the teacher. In preparation for setting examination papers, try to 
develop an item bank. The term “item bank” is a general term for a pool of objective test items, a pool of essay questions or a pool of practical test questions to fit 
selected specific objectives which you consider important to be tested. If you proceed diligently, you will realize you have written more than 100 objective test 
items and more than 30 essay questions in a space of one year or less. Randomly select from the item bank to compose the test papers. Select with 
replacement. This means, as items / questions are selected for testing, new ones have to be written to replace those items / questions already used in 
examinations. Test items that have been used in examinations may also be modified and stored in the item bank. 
GUIDELINES FOR SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT 
A new School Based Assessment system (SBA) will be introduced into the school system in 2011. The new SBA system is designed to provide schools with an 
internal assessment system that will help schools to achieve the following purposes: 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Standardize the practice of internal school-based assessment in all Senior High Schools in the country 
Provide reduced assessment tasks for subjects studied at SHS 
Provide teachers with guidelines for constructing assessment items/questions and other assessment tasks 
Introduce standards of achievement in each subject and in each SHS class 
Provide guidance in marking and grading of test items/questions and other assessment tasks 
Introduce a system of moderation that will ensure accuracy and reliability of teachers‟ marks 
Provide teachers with advice on how to conduct remedial instruction on difficult areas of the syllabus to improve class performance. 
The arrangement for SBA may be grouped in categories as follows. Laboratory work, Projects, Group Work and End of Term Examinations 
1. Laboratory Work: 
Students will be required to keep laboratory notebook. It is of utmost importance that records be neatly and accurately kept by both student and teacher. 
Projects/Field Work: These are tasks assigned to students to be completed over an extended time. 
These will involve the following: 
i)Practical work 
ii)Experiment 
iii)Investigative study (including case study) 
A report must be written for each project undertaken. 
3. 
4. 
Mid-Term Test: The mid-term test following a prescribed format will form part of the SBA 
Group Exercise: This will consist of written assignments or practical work on a topic(s) considered important or complicated in the term‟s syllabus 
2. 
xiv 

5. End-of-Tem Examination: The end-of-term test is a summative assessment system and should consist of the knowledge and skills students have acquired 
in the term. The end-of-term test for Term 3 for example, should be composed of items/questions based on the specific objectives studied over the three 
terms, using a different weighting system such as to reflect the importance of the work done in each term in appropriate proportions. For example, a 
teacher may build an End-of-Term 3 test in such a way that it would consist of the 20% of the objectives studied in Term 1, 20% of objectives studied in 
Term 2 and 60% of the objectives studied in Term 3. The end-of-term 3 test should therefore sample the knowledge and skills acquired over the three 
school terms in appropriate proportions. 
GRADING PROCEDURE 
To improve assessment and grading and also introduce uniformity in schools, it is recommended that schools adopt the following WASSCE grade structure for 
assigning grades on students‟ test results. 
Grade A1: 
Grade B2: 
Grade B3: 
Grade C4: 
Grade C5: 
Grade C6: 
Grade D7: 
Grade D8: 
Grade F9: 
80 - 100% 
70 - 79% 
60 - 69% 
55 - 59% 
50 - 54% 
45 - 49% 
40 - 44% 
35 - 39% 
34% and below 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 - 
Excellent 
Very Good 
Good 
Credit 
Credit 
Credit 
Pass 
Pass 
Fail 
In assigning grades to students‟ test results, you are encouraged to apply the above grade boundaries and the descriptors which indicate the meaning of each 
grade. The grade boundaries i.e., 60-69%, 50-54% etc., are the grade cut-off scores. For instance, the grade cut-off score for B2 grade is 70-79% in the example. 
When you adopt a fixed cut-off score grading system as in this example, you are using the criterion-referenced grading system. By this system a student must 
make a specified score to be awarded the requisite grade. This system of grading challenges students to study harder to earn better grades. It is hence a very 
useful system for grading achievement tests. 
Always remember to develop and use a marking scheme for marking your class examination scripts. A marking scheme consists of the points for the best answer 
you expect for each question, and the marks allocated for each point raised by the student as well as the total marks for the question. For instance, if a question 
carries 20 marks and you expect 6 points in the best answer, you could allocate 3 marks or part of it (depending upon the quality of the points raised by the 
student) to each point , hence totaling 18 marks, and then give the remaining 2 marks or part of it for organisation of answer. For objective test papers you may 
develop an answer key to speed up the marking. 
xv 

SHS 1 
SECTION 1 
General Objectives: The students will 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
appreciate the variety of living and non-living things and their interconnectedness. 
develop a scientific approach to problem solving. 
develop safety skills required to work with laboratory apparatus. 
recognize the importance of measurement in science. 
understand the nature of matter in its various forms. 
DIVERSITY OF MATTER 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
INTRODUCTIO 
N TO 
INTEGRATED 
SCIENCE 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
1.1.1 explain that there are 
      various branches of 
      science which are 
      interrelated and 
      relevant to the world 
      of life. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
Let students: 
EVALUATION 
Concept of integrated science discuss the following: 
Science as an interrelated body of knowledge consisting of various 
branches of science. 
Why the need for science specialist to acquire all round knowledge 
in all science areas namely Chemistry, Biology, Physics, Geology, 
Astronomy, Agriculture 
Discuss some careers in science and science related fields, what 
they do and the education and training necessary for these careers 
GROUP ACTIVITY: Students in groups design and draw diagrams 
to show the inter-relationship between the various branches of 
Science and Technology. Groups to display their work in class for 
discussion. 
Discuss the relevance of 
the study of chemistry, 
biology and physics to 
specialists such as soil 
scientist, a nurse, a 
medical doctor and a 
geologist 
Identify two applied science 
professions and explain the 
science they practice and 
the education and training 
necessary for these 
careers. 
1.1.2 apply the scientific 
      method to arrive at 
      scientific solutions to 
      everyday problems. 
The scientific method: 
identification of the problem, 
hypothesis formulation, 
experimentation, data 
collection, analysis and 
conclusion. 
apply scientific concepts and principles in everyday life activities 
such as treatment of drinking water; finding cure for diseases. 
discuss scientific method and explain how scientists solve problems. 
1 

UNIT 
UNIT 1 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
Let students: 
NOTE: 
1. Explanation of scientific method should include identification of 
   the problem, hypothesis, experimentation (observation, 
   collection, recording and analysis of data) and conclusion. 
2. The discovery of penicillin, radioactivity and the law of 
   floatation may be used to illustrate the scientific method. 
3. Explain to students that quest for knowledge and curiosity are 
necessary to arrive at the truth, facts and solutions to 
problems. 
EVALUATION 
There is malaria 
outbreak in your 
community. 
Outline the scientific 
method you would 
follow to control the 
outbreak. 
PROJECT WORK: 
Teacher to assist students in small groups to investigate a common 
problem in the community e.g. frequent flooding, and apply scientific 
method to arrive at a solution to the problem. 
Students can also select problems of interest to them and 
investigate. 
1.1.3 follow basic safety 
      precautions in the 
      laboratory. 
Safety precautions in the 
laboratory. 
Carry out demonstrations on safety precautions in the use of the 
Laboratory; laboratory equipment, chemicals etc. 
Suggest four (4) safety 
measures to be taken in 
a Science Laboratory 
UNIT 2 
MEASUREMENT 
1.2.1 use SI units in all 
     measurements 
Basic units and Derived units. 
Discuss the following basic units of scientific measurements: 
Length (m), mass (kg), Time (s), Temperature (K), Current (A), 
Amount of substance (mol), Luminous intensity (cd) 
Discuss the following derived quantities and their units: Volume 
   3-3-1 
(m ), Density (kg m ), Velocity (ms ), Force (N), Work and Energy 
(J), Quantity of electricity (C), electric resistance (Ώ), Potential 
difference(V), Power (W) 
Derive the formula for 
finding: 
 i. the density of a 
     substance 
 ii. velocity of a body in 
     motion 
Give three reasons why 
quantities should be 
measured accurately 
and honestly. 
1.2.2 use scientific 
      measuring 
      instruments 
      accurately. 
Using scientific measuring 
instruments. 
use instruments such as ruler, balances, stop watches, 
thermometer, ammeter, measuring cylinder, calipers, pipettes, 
burette, hydrometer etc. to measure quantities in various units. 
Teacher to assist students to acquire skills in using eyes, hands and 
judgment when taking measurement. 
Truthful and accurate recording of 
data. 
Concept of replication of results. 
2 

UNIT 
UNIT 2 
cont 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Sources of errors in scientific 
experiments. 
discuss the importance of replication and checking of results by 
different scientists using the same procedure to ensure accuracy 
and consistency of results; to arrive at hypothesis; to make better 
predictions; to add to scientific knowledge. 
NOTE: Teacher to remind students that values such as honesty, 
integrity and truthfulness can be developed through measuring and 
recording of data accurately. 
Mention six human 
values that are of 
importance to the 
scientist 
1.2.3 measure density and 
      relative density. 
Density and relative density. review topic on density from JHS Syllabus. Carry out experiments 
to determine the density of equal volumes of water and salt solution. 
Compare densities of water and salt solution. 
Describe an experiment 
to determine the density 
of a piece of stone. 
UNIT: 3 
DIVERSITY OF 
LIVING AND 
NON-LIVING 
THINGS 
1.3.1 differentiate between 
      living and non-living 
      things 
Life processes: 
Movement, nutrition, growth, 
respiration, excretion, 
reproduction, response to 
stimulus. 
review characteristic features and examples of living and non-living 
things from JHS syllabus. 
explore the school environment to observe and record diverse ways 
living organisms move, feed, grow, respire, reproduce and respond 
to stimuli. 
discuss their observations in class and relate them to the existence 
of biodiversity. 
NOTE: Detailed treatment of the life processes not required at this 
stage. 
Outline five basic life 
processes which unite 
all living organisms. 
Explain the term 
biodiversity. 
1.3.2 classify living and non- 
      living things 
Classification schemes of living 
and non-living things: 
discuss the following: 
Classification schemes of living and non-living things. 
History and importance of classification. 
Outline the order of 
classification of living 
organisms. 
a) Living Things: 
Kingdom, division/phylum, class, 
order, family, genus species. 
Important personalities such as the following should be mentioned: 
Aristotle (early classification), 
Linnaeus (binomial system of classifying living things) 
NOTE: 
Include naming of organisms using the Binomial System of 
nomenclature (Linnaeus system of classification) e.g. man and 
maize. 
3 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
b) Non-living things: 
Elements: metals and non- 
metals. 
Mendeleev Periodic table of elements into eighteen groups and into 
metals, non-metals and semi-metals, and classification of living 
societies. 
NOTE: 
      stth 
The 1 to the 20 element in the period table should each be 
classified as metal or non-metal. 
review the nature, state and properties of matter through discussion. 
NOTE 
Diagrammatic representation is necessary for atoms and molecules 
        stth 
of the 1 to 20 element on the periodic table. 
Elements, compounds and 
mixtures. 
discuss and bring out the differences between elements, 
compounds and mixtures. 
prepare simple mixtures and compounds in class.e.g. 
    solid-solid mixtures 
    solid-liquid mixtures 
    liquid-liquid mixtures 
    gas-liquid mixture 
    gas-gas mixtures 
use models or diagrams to assist the students to discuss: 
1. Ionic bond formation as a result of transfer of electrons from one 
   atom to another resulting in the formation of cations and anions. 
2. Electrostatic attractions between cations and anion to give ionic 
   bond. 
3. Covalent bond formation between atoms or groups to give 
   covalent compound 
4. characteristic properties of ionic and covalent compounds 
NOTE: 
 IUPAC names of common compounds should be taught. 
discuss the items listed under the content. 
write down mass number of a given element based on given number 
of protons or electrons and number of neutrons. 
Describe the formation 
of sodium chloride 
(NaCl) and ammonia 
(NH3) 
Classify the following 
materials into elements, 
compounds and 
mixtures: water, salt, 
iron filings sea water, 
sulphur, air and glass. 
Draw and label the 
following atoms: 
Oxygen, Hydrogen and 
Chlorine 
UNIT 4 
MATTER 
1.4.1 describe the different 
      building blocks of 
      matter. 
Particulate nature of matter: 
atoms, molecules and ions. 
1.4.2 differentiate between 
      elements, compounds 
      and mixtures. 
1.4.3 describe the formation 
      of covalent and ionic 
      compounds. 
Ionic and covalent compounds. 
1.4.4 relate atomic numbers, 
      mass numbers, 
      isotopes and relative 
      atomic mass among 
      each other. 
Atomic number, mass number, 
isotopes and relative atomic mass 
of given elements. 
4 

UNIT 
UNIT 4 
MATTER 
(Cont) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
1.4.5 perform calculations 
      using the mole 
      concept. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Mole, molar mass and formula 
mass. 
Relationship between grams and 
moles 
explain relative atomic masses using the periodic table. 
NOTE: 
Carbon-12 isotope should be mentioned as the reference scale. 
calculate the following: 
1. Formula mass and molar mass using given relative atomic 
masses. 
2. Amount of substance in moles given its mass 
Calculate the amount of 
substance in 9g of 
aluminum 
(Al = 27 g/mol) 
NOTE: Mention should be made of the mole as a unit of the physical 
quantity, amount of substance. 
             23 
L = 6.02 x 10 particles as the Avogadro constant; 
use of n = 
m 
  relationship to calculate amount of substance where 
M 
n is the symbol for amount of substance, 
m is the mass, 
M is the molar mass. 
1.4.6 prepare solutions of 
      given concentrations. 
Preparation of solutions of given 
 concentrations 
Brainstorm to define the concentration of a solution in mol/dm ; 
     -3 
g/dm , percentage and ppm. 
3 
NOTE: calculations in part per million not required 
carry out simple calculations with the relationship 
c 
amount of subs tan ce (n ) 
     volume of solution( v) 
Prepare solutions of a given concentration e.g. IM solution of 
a) NaOH (b) NaCl 
dilute solutions of given concentrations and discuss everyday 
application of dilution 
e.g. food preparation, drug preparation. 
5 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Plant and animal cells. Review the structure and function of plant and animal cells in a 
discussion. 
Observe prepared slides of different types of plant and animal cells. 
e.g. red blood cell, nerve cell, leaf epidermal cell, sperm cell, leaf 
palisade cell, lymphocyte, phagocyte. 
Discuss the functions of cell organelles. 
draw and label plant and animal cells 
NOTE: 
1. Electron micrographs can be obtained from books. 
2. Mention should be made of stem cells. 
1. State six differences 
between plant and 
animal cells. 
2. State one function of 
each of the following 
organelles: 
(i) Mitochondrion. 
(ii) Chloroplast. 
(iii) Nucleus. 
 (v) Endoplasmic 
reticulum 
(vi) Vacuole. 
UNIT: 5 
CELLS 
1.5.1 describe the structure 
      and function of plant 
      and animal cells. 
Types of plant and animal cells 
Specialized cells. 
UNIT:6 
ROCKS 
1.6.1 describe the major 
     types of rocks, their 
     formation and 
     characteristics. 
Rocks: Types (igneous, 
sedimentary and metamorphic), 
formation and characteristics. 
Explore the school environment/community to identify different types 
of rocks. 
discuss the formation of igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic 
rocks and their characteristics 
State two characteristics 
each of the following 
rock types: 
(i) Sedimentary rocks. 
(ii) Igneous rocks. 
1.6.2 explain the process of 
      weathering of rocks. 
Weathering of rocks: 
physical, 
biological, 
chemical. 
Discuss physical, biological and chemical weathering of rocks. 
NOTE: Explanation of the effect of hydration, hydrolysis, 
carbonation and oxidation on rocks is required. 
Investigate and write a 
report on types of 
weathering processes 
occurring in the school 
community. 
6 

SHS 1 
SECTION 2 
General Objectives: The students will 
1. 
2. 
3. 
recognise that there are repeated patterns of change in nature and understand how these patterns arise. 
understand the pattern of air movements around the earth, their effects and the necessary precautions to take when storms occur. 
appreciate the cyclic movement of nitrogen between the soil and the atmosphere. 
CYCLES 
UNIT 
UNIT 1 
AIR 
MOVEMENT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
2.1.1 explain the formation 
      of land and sea 
      breezes. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Land and sea breezes. Design models to demonstrate convectional current during the formation of 
land and sea breezes. 
NOTE: 
Examples of models that could be designed are the smoke box and heated 
water with crystals of KMnO4. 
Design models and discuss the direction of movement of major air masses on 
the earth‟s surface. 
NOTE: Description of pattern of air movement should be limited to air masses 
affecting seasons in the West African sub-region. 
Explain why sea breeze 
occurs during the 
day and land breeze 
during 
the night. 
2.1.2 identify the various 
     types of air masses 
     and describe their 
     pattern of movement. 
Types of air masses 
and their movements. 
Trade winds: Easterlies 
and Westerlies 
2.1.3 describe the effect of 
      moving air masses. 
Effect of moving air 
masses: 
Formation of 
storms/cyclones. 
Precautions against the 
effects of storms. 
Discuss differences between air masses and storms. 
Discuss early warning signs of approaching storms. 
Discuss some effects of moving air masses: Spread of pollutants, effect on 
climate etc. 
NOTE: 
Tornadoes, hurricanes, typhoons are terms which describe cyclones in 
different parts of the world. 
Mention two warning 
signs of approaching 
storms and two 
precautions to be taken 
to ensure safety. 
7 

UNIT 
UNIT 1 
(Cont) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
PROJECT: 
Students in groups of two or three to use search engines from the 
internet or local newspapers or international news stations to gather 
information and write a report on storms around the world, 
forecasting procedures, early warning signs etc. 
Students make a presentation of report in class for discussion and 
award of marks. 
Draw a future‟s wheel to 
show 
the consequences of the 
spread of pollutants by 
moving air masses 
around the earth. 
Explain how pollutants 
from one country could 
lead to problems in 
another country. 
UNIT: 2 
NITROGEN 
CYCLE 
2.2.1 describe the nitrogen 
     cycle. 
2.2.2 explain the importance 
     of nitrogen cycle to 
     plants and animals. 
Nitrogen cycle. Draw and discuss the Nitrogen cycle. 
Importance of nitrogen cycle. discuss the importance of the nitrogen cycle to plants and animals 
e.g. improvement of soil fertility. 
Explain the following 
processes involved in 
the nitrogen cycle: 
1. nitrification 
2. denitrification 
8 

SHS 1 
SECTION 3 
General Objectives: The students will 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
recognize that a system is a whole, consisting of parts that work together to perform a function. 
recognize that the mammalian skeleton consists of many different bones which work together. 
understand the different parts of a plant and how they function together for plant growth and reproduction. 
be aware of the parts of the body which operate to perform respiratory and digestive functions 
recognize the process of transportation of substances in living organism as life system. 
SYSTEMS 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 
UNIT 
The students will be able to: 
UNIT 1 
SKELETAL 
SYSTEM 
3.1.1 describe the structure 
      and functions of the 
      mammalian skeleton. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Major parts of the 
mammalian skeleton and 
their functions. 
Axial skeleton: 
Skull and vertebral column. 
Appendicular skeleton: 
Limbs and the limb girdles. 
use a model of a mammalian skeleton to discuss major parts of the 
mammalian skeleton and their functions. 
NOTE: 
1. Discussion to include types of joints. 
2. Detailed treatment of the structure of individual bones not 
   needed. 
Outline five functions of 
the mammalian 
skeleton. 
UNIT 2 
REPRODUCTION 
AND GROWTH IN 
PLANTS 
3.2.1 identify parts of a 
      flower and variations in 
      flower structure 
Structure of flowers examine the following: 
Complete flower and also half flower with free parts. 
Bi-sexual flower, e.g. Flamboyant or Pride 
of Barbados or Hibiscus. 
Uni-sexual flower with free parts e.g. water melon, gourd, pawpaw 
and Paretusa. 
Make a half-flower 
drawing of a bi-sexual 
flower and label the 
parts. 
9 

UNIT 
UNIT 2 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
PROJECT: 
   1. make a collection of about ten different flower specimens. 
   2. open fully to locate the main parts. 
   3. mount each flower on a separate sheet of paper and the 
      parts separated out and labeled. 
   4. enclose each flower with a plastic sheet and transparent 
      tape. 
   5. display work by groups on a bulletin board or science table 
      for award of marks. 
3.2.2 describe the 
      processes of 
      pollination and 
      fertilization. 
Mechanisms of pollination and 
fertilization. 
Refer to JHS syllabus to review the process of pollination and 
fertilization. Fertilization should be limited to processes where the 
male nuclei fuses with female nuclei to form zygote and endosperm. 
Formation of fruits and seeds should be discussed. 
Watch digitized or video version of pollination and fertilization. 
Formation of fruits and seeds. 
3.2.3 describe different 
      types of fruits. 
Types of fruits: dry fruits and 
fleshy or succulent fruits. 
Collect different types of fruits and group them into dry and fleshy or 
succulent fruits. 
Draw a section of a drupe and a berry, e.g. mango and cowpea. 
Draw and label a 
named endospermous 
seed and give the 
functions of each 
labeled part. 
3.2.4 describe the structure 
      of seeds and state the 
      functions of their 
      parts. 
Seed structure: 
Endospermous (monocots) and 
non-endospermous (dicots) 
seeds. 
3.2.5 identify the agents of 
     dispersal of seeds and 
     fruits. 
Seeds and fruits dispersal 
GROUP ACTIVITY: 
    1. make a collection of different seeds from the community. 
    2. Study the features, draw and label the longitudinal section 
        of two of the seeds e.g. maize and Jatropha sp. 
    3. list the functions of the parts. 
    4. keep information on each seed including name of collector, 
        date of collection, differences in size, shape, colour and 
        uses. 
Study and discuss the structure of seeds/fruits and how they are 
adapted to their mode of dispersal; agents for dispersal. 
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of fruit and seed 
dispersal. 
Relate the structure of 
the following seeds and 
fruits to their mode of 
dispersal: 
      1. Balsam fruit 
      2. Pride of 
           Barbados fruit 
      3. Mango fruit 
      4. Coconut fruit 
      5. Silk cotton 
           seed 
      6. Tridax sp. 
10 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
3.2.6 describe the process 
      and conditions 
      necessary for 
      germination. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Process and conditions of 
germination. 
Types of seed germination: 
   Hypogeal, 
   Epigeal. 
Methods of vegetative 
reproduction in plants and their 
importance. 
Review the process and conditions for germination of seeds in JHS 
syllabus. 
Sow different types of seeds and identify the type of germination of 
each. e.g. maize(hypogeal), cowpea, groundnut/peanut( epigeal). 
Use diagrams to explain 
epigeal and hypogeal 
germination. 
3.2.7 describe vegetative 
      (asexual) reproduction 
      in plants. 
bring samples of propagatory materials to examine and discuss how 
new plants are produced from corms, setts, bulbs, rhizomes, 
cuttings, stolons runners, - 
Discuss budding and grafting. 
Write word equations for aerobic and anaerobic respirations 
Outline two advantages 
and two disadvantages 
of vegetative 
propagation of plants. 
Distinguish between 
budding and grafting. 
UNIT 3 
FOOD AND 
NUTRITION 
3.3.1 outline the different 
      classes of food and 
      describe a balanced 
      diet. 
Classes of food and food 
substances, their source and 
importance: carbohydrates, 
proteins, lipids, vitamins, mineral 
salts and water. 
Review topic on classes of food and food substances from the JHS 
syllabus. 
Test for starch, proteins and lipids in different types of foods. 
Discuss the importance of food substances to the human body 
Students to match the 
following nutrients and 
their functions 
     i.starch 
     ii.protein 
     iii.lipids. 
Balanced diet. 
Discuss the components of a balanced diet e.g. carbohydrates for 
energy 
3.3.2 state the effects of 
      malnutrition 
3.3.3 explain the need to 
      fortify and enrich food. 
Effects of malnutrition. 
Discuss malnutrition and its effects 
Food fortification and enrichment 
Discuss the essence of food fortification and enrichment. 
NOTE: 
1. Relation between diet and certain diseases and disorders such as 
  Night blindness, High Blood Pressure, Diabetes, Obesity, Lactose 
  intolerance and Kwashiorkor should be stressed. 
2. Determine the Body Mass Indices (B.M.I) of students and relate 
  to health standards. 
Explain the following 
terminologies 
i. balanced diet 
ii. Malnutrition. 
B.M.I = 
Body w eight(kg) 
[Height (cm)]2 
11 

UNIT 
UNIT 3 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVES 
The student will be able to: 
CONTENT TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
Let students: 
3. Importance of roughage should be included in the discussion. 
EVALUATION 
3.3.4 outline the health 
      benefits of water 
UNIT 4 
DENTITION, 
FEEDING AND 
DIGESTION IN 
MAMMALS 
Health benefits of water State the importance of water to the body. 
3.4.1 identify the different 
      types of teeth in 
      mammals and relate 
      them to their 
      functions. 
Structure of different types of 
teeth in relation to their functions. 
Review structure and functions of the teeth. 
Identify the parts of the vertical section of a tooth. 
Discuss differences in dentition in human and other mammals. 
NOTE: 
Relate dentition to diet. 
Annotate structural 
parts of molar and 
canine teeth. 
3.4.2. enumerate various 
       ways of preventing 
       dental problems. 
Care of the teeth in humans. Demonstrate proper ways of caring for the teeth to prevent dental 
problems, e.g. 
    1. cleaning the teeth daily 
    2. visiting the dentist at least twice a year 
    3. feeding on mineral-rich food. 
Examine a chart or model of the digestive system of human and 
identify parts of the alimentary canal, the glands and organs 
associated with digestion. 
3.4.3 identify the parts the 
      digestive system of 
      humans. 
Structure and functions of the 
digestive system of humans. 
Annotate a diagram of 
human digestive system 
on a chart or computer. 
UNIT 5 
RESPARATO 
RY SYSTEM 
3.5.1 define respiration and 
      explain its importance 
Respiration as a source of energy 
for body processes. 
Discuss the meaning of respiration and how energy is released from 
food substances for living organisms. 
 NOTE: 
Teacher, using controlled experiments, should demonstrate the 
release of heat energy and carbon dioxide during respiration of 
germinating seeds, small animals and yeast (fermentation of corn 
dough). 
The human body 
systems work 
interdependently to 
perform a life function 
and sustain life. 
  Identify three human 
  body systems that 
  affect the respiratory 
  system. 
12 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Describe how each of 
the three systems 
affects the respiratory 
system. 
Let students: 
3.5.2 distinguish between 
      aerobic an 
3.5.3 identify the organs of 
      the respiratory system 
      of humans and 
      describe their 
      functions. 
3.5.4 enumerate some 
      problems and 
      disorders associated 
      with the respiratory 
      system in humans. 
3.5.5 explain how 
      respiratory gases are 
      taken in and out of 
      plants. 
Aerobic and anaerobic respiration. Discuss aerobic and anaerobic respiration. 
Write word equations for aerobic and anaerobic respirations. 
Discuss the functions of the trachea, lungs, ribs, intercostal muscles 
and diaphragm. 
Observe chat/video clip/animated version of respiration process in 
humans. 
Mention and discuss briefly some problems and disorders 
associated with the respiratory system e.g. Lung cancer, Asthma, 
T.B., Whooping Cough, Pneumonia etc. 
Structure and functions of the 
respiratory system in humans. 
Inhalation and exhalation 
Differentiate between 
aerobic and anaerobic 
respiration. 
Problems and disorders 
associated with the respiratory 
system in humans. 
Describe the mechanism 
by which air is taken in 
and out of the lungs in 
humans. 
Exchange of respiratory gases in 
plants. 
Discuss how they can be prevented and controlled. 
Describe how 
respiratory gases enter 
and leave plant tissues 
Discuss how respiratory gases, e.g. oxygen and carbon (IV) oxide 
are taken in and out of plants. 
NOTE: 
Cell (tissue) respiration to be mentioned as a chemical process that 
produces energy for life activities of organisms (glycolysis and 
Krebs‟s cycle not required). 
13 

SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 
UNIT 
The students will be able to: 
UNIT 6 
TRANSPORT- 
DIFFUSION AND 
OSMOSIS. 
3.6.1 explain processes of 
      diffusion and osmosis 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Diffusion and osmosis Review topics in JHS syllabus on diffusion and osmosis. 
Perform simple experiments to demonstrate diffusion in air and 
liquids. 
Perform experiment to demonstrate osmosis in a living tissue 
using yam/cassava/cocoyam and in a non-living tissue using 
cellophane sheet. 
Record and discuss your observations. 
Give examples of life processes in which diffusion and osmosis 
occur, e.g. absorption in the small intestine, re-absorption of 
water in the kidney and transpiration. 
PROJECT: 
Group of student to apply the principles of osmosis in the 
following activities: 
i. Salting of fish for preservation e.g. Tilapia („‟koobi‟‟) 
ii. Preservation of liquid food products e.g. fruit juice 
concentrate 
(a ). Explain the following terms: 
i. hypertonic solution 
ii. hypotonic solution 
iii. isotonic solution 
(b). Explain the effect of 
introducing red blood cell into 
 i. hypertonic solution 
 ii. hypotonic solution 
 iii. isotonic solution 
Two containers X and Y each 
hold one litre of air. X also 
contains 0.4g of a gas and Y 
contains 0.6 g of the same gas. 
The two containers are connected 
together as shown in the diagram. 
(i). Which way will the gas 
diffuse? 
(ii). After a long period of time, 
what will be the concentration of 
the gas (in grams per litre) in each 
container? 
14 

SHS 1 
SECTION 4: ENERGY 
General Objectives: The students will: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
recognize that energy has a source, and can be transferred and transformed into other forms 
understand the application of solar energy in daily activities and in the manufacture of plant food. 
Be aware of the behaviour of discrete electronic components 
UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Forms of energy and energy 
transformation. 
Refer to JHS syllabus for a review on forms of energy. 
Illustrate with flow charts to show the following energy 
transformations: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
solar energy to chemical energy in photosynthesis. 
chemical energy to electrical energy in voltaic cells 
solar energy to electrical energy in solar cells. 
chemical energy in fossil fuel into thermal energy/electrical 
energy 
potential energy to kinetic energy in falling object. 
electrical energy to light energy in bulbs. 
chemical energy is released from glucose during cellular 
respiration. 
Describe three activities 
to show how energy is 
conserved. 
Explain why the 
efficiency of energy 
converters is not 100% 
With the aid of diagrams 
show the energy 
transformation in 
(i) photosynthesis 
(ii) respiration. 
UNIT: 1 
FORMS OF 
ENERGY AND 
ENERGY 
TRANSFORM- 
ATION 
4.1.1 distinguish between 
      various forms of 
      energy and modes of 
      transformation. 
4.1.2 discuss the 
      conservation of energy 
      and efficiency of 
      energy conversion. 
Conservation of energy and 
 efficiency of energy conversion 
discuss the principle of conservation of energy. 
demonstrate the principle of transformation of energy by considering 
the transformation of potential energy to kinetic energy using a 
falling object 
discuss the efficiency (E) of energy conversion using the expression 
E 
energy output 
energy input 
100% 
15 

SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 
UNIT 
The students will be able to: 
UNIT: 2 
SOLAR ENERGY 
4.2.1 identify the uses of solar 
      energy. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Uses of solar energy: 
Generation of electricity from solar 
panel/solar cells. 
Drying. 
Solar heaters 
Application of solar energy in 
practical daily activities. 
Carry out practical activities to demonstrate the application 
of solar energy to: 
     1. dry clothes 
     2. heat water for bathing 
     3. dry crops for preservation 
     4. cook, e.g. corn, sausages, hot dog, fish and ripe 
          plantain 
     5. boil an egg. 
Outline the advantages 
of solar energy over the 
use of fossil fuel as 
source of energy 
discuss the main applications of solar energy: generating 
electricity, drying materials and heating substances. 
Describe the process 
involved in the 
generation of electricity 
from solar panel. 
UNIT 3 
PHOTOSYNTHESIS 
4.3.1 describe the process of 
      photosynthesis. 
The process of photosynthesis. Carry out control experiments to show the necessity of 
light, chlorophyll and carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. 
Discuss the conditions of photosynthesis. Conditions for photosynthesis: 
    Light, 
    Chlorophyll, 
    carbon dioxide, 
    water. 
4.3.2. explain the process of 
       the transformation of 
       energy that occurs 
       during photosynthesis. 
Conversion of light energy to 
chemical energy. 
Use word and symbol equations to show how light energy 
is trapped during the process of photosynthesis and 
converted to glucose. 
Test for starch in a leaf. 
Describe an experiment 
to demonstrate that light 
is essential for 
photosynthesis. 
16 

SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 
UNIT 
The students will be able to: 
UNIT 4: 
ELECTRONICS 
4.4.1 observe the behaviour of 
      discrete electronic 
      components in a d.c. 
      electronic circuit. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Behaviour of discrete electronic 
components:resistor, capacitor and 
inductor – in a d.c and electronic 
circuits. 
Connect a simple electronic circuit comprising a d.c. 
source, a resistor and a Light Emitting Diode (LED) in 
series. 
Compare the 
behaviour of an LED 
when a capacitor is in 
a d.c or a.c electronic 
circuit. 
observe the behaviour of the LED when: 
1. the switch is closed 
2. switch is opened 
3. resistor is replaced with capacitor. 
4. capacitor is replaced with inductor or coil. 
Repeat the experiment by replacing the d.c. source with a 
12V a.c. source. 
PROJECT: 
Design and construct an electronic mosquito repellant 
using the capacitor, inductor and transistor arrangement. 
17 

SHS 1 
SECTION 5: INTERACTIONS OF MATTER 
General Objectives: The student will: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
appreciate that the interaction between and within matter helps humans to better understand the environment and their role in it. 
recognize the effect of changing climatic conditions on the environment. 
be aware of movements of the earth and the effects of these movements. 
recognize the harmful effects of disease-causing organisms and the need to control them. 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
ECOSYSTEM 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
5.1.1 define basic 
     ecological terms. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Basic biological terms: 
Ecology, Species, population, 
community, ecosystem, ecosphere. 
Types of ecosystem and components. 
Natural: fresh water, marine, estuarine, 
lake, rainforest, savanna and desert 
Artificial: farmland, man-made lakes, 
roads. 
Components of ecosystem: 
Biotic/living component including plants 
and animals. 
Abiotic / non-living component including 
soil, air and water. 
Ecological factors: 
Biotic - predation, competition. 
Abiotic – climatic (rainfall, humidity, 
temperature) salinity, altitude, slope of 
land etc. 
Identify the components of an ecosystem and discuss how 
they affect each other. 
Brainstorm to bring out the meaning of the ecological terms: 
species, population, community, ecosystem, ecosphere. 
Differentiate between 
the following ecological 
terms: 
 i. ecosystem and 
      ecology 
 ii. ecosystem and 
      ecosphere 
 iii. species and 
      population 
 iv. population and 
      community 
Describe the interaction 
between the 
components of a named 
ecosystem. 
5.1.2 classify ecosystems 
      and identify their 
      components 
Classify the various ecosystems: terrestrial, fresh water, 
marine etc. 
Classify ecological factors into biotic and abiotic and show how 
they affect the distribution, abundance and development of 
plants and animals (humans). 
Discuss appropriate instruments used to measure abiotic 
factors. 
18 

UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
(CONT’D) 
ECOSYSTEM 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
5.1.3 explain food chain 
     and food web and 
     identify the 
     components. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Components of a food chain and 
food web. 
Explain and describe food chain and food web and identify the 
components: 
 1. Producers (green plants). 
 2. Primary consumers (plant eaters or herbivores) 
 3. Secondary consumers (flesh eaters/ carnivores). 
NOTE: Mention should be made of prey and predator relationship 
2. Omnivores are grouped with primary and secondary consumers 
3. Decomposers/detritivores must be mentioned as indispensable 
   in an ecosystem. 
FIELD TRIP: 
Students to visit natural habitat or relevant eco-centres e.g. National 
Parks. 
Show how efficient the 
energy transfer between 
producers and 
consumers is 
Draw a simple food 
chain in a named 
ecosystem. 
Use the following 
organisms to construct a 
food web; green grass, 
lizard, hawk, locust, 
butterfly, frog, tiger and 
antelope. 
UNIT: 2 
ATMOSPHERE 
AND 
CLIMATE 
CHANGE 
5.2.1 identify the various 
      layers of the 
      atmosphere. 
Layers of the atmosphere: 
Troposphere, stratosphere, 
mesosphere and 
thermosphere/ionosphere. 
Brainstorm to bring out the layers of the atmosphere 
Describe the characteristics of troposphere and stratosphere in 
terms of thickness, temperature, air quality and composition, 
pressure and support for human activities 
Gather information from the internet and scientific journals on the 
effects of human activities on the atmosphere i.e. air transport, 
defense, industrialization, agriculture etc. 
Discuss the sources and the effects of the following pollutants: 
Oxides of lead (PbO), nitrogen (NO2) and sulphur (SO2 and SO3); 
ozone, halons/freons (carbon and halogen compounds or CFCs). 
5.2.2 outline the effects of 
      human activities on 
      the atmosphere. 
5.2.3 describe the major 
      pollutants of the 
      atmosphere and their 
      effects 
5.2.4 explain Greenhouse 
      effect on climate 
      change. 
Human activities and their effects 
on the atmosphere 
Differentiate between 
the troposphere and 
stratosphere in terms of 
the following: 
temperature, air 
composition and 
pressure 
Major atmospheric pollutants: 
sources and effects. 
Greenhouse effect and climate 
change 
Give examples of Greenhouse gases e.g. Carbon (IV) oxide, 
methane. 
Discuss what a “greenhouse‟‟ is and its effect: Global warming and 
climate change. 
Outline five effects of 
climate change on 
biodiversity resources. 
19 

UNIT 
UNIT: 2 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able 
to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Desertification, drought 
Melting of ice and polar ice caps, 
rising sea levels 
Increase in number and intensity of 
hurricanes (cyclones), effects on 
biodiversity resources, etc. 
Discuss possible factors to address the problem of global warming. 
PROJECT: 
Students to interview people in the community to find out and report 
on climate change in the community over the past thirty to fifty years 
and its effect on the community. 
5.2.5 explain the causes 
and effects of the 
depletion of the 
ozone layer. 
Causes and the effects of the 
depletion of the ozone layer 
State what the ozone layer is and discuss how it protects living 
organisms. 
Relate the sources and effects of CFCs on the ozone layer. 
Mention two effects of 
the supersonic air 
transport on the ozone 
layer. 
5.2.6 explain the causes 
and effects of acid 
rain. 
Acid rain and its effects: 
Damage to buildings, paints and 
forests. 
Identify acidic pollutants which cause acid rain. 
discuss the effects of acid rain the environment 
(damage to buildings, forests etc) 
Mention three examples 
of acidic pollutants and 
how they affect forests 
and buildings 
UNIT: 3 
INFECTIONS 
AND 
DISEASES 
5.3.1 describe the causes 
      of diseases. 
Pathogenic: bacteria, virus, fungi, 
protozoa. 
Non-pathogenic: nutritional, 
genetic, stress. 
discuss the causes of pathogenic diseases under the following: 
headings: bacteria, virus, fungi and protozoa. 
describe the causes of non-pathogenic diseases under the following 
headings: 
poor nutrition, genetic, stress conditions poor sanitation etc. 
discuss modes of transmission, symptoms, method of prevention 
and control of at least two examples of pathogenic and non- 
pathogenic diseases. 
Give one example each of the diseases mentioned under the 
content, their modes of transmission, symptoms and method of 
control. 
NOTE: 
Detailed treatment of individual diseases not needed. 
5.3.2 describe the modes 
      of transmission, 
      symptoms and 
      modes of control of 
      common diseases. 
Modes of transmission. 
Discuss the courses, 
symptoms, mode of 
transmission, prevention 
and control of the 
following common 
diseases: anthrax, 
Newcastle, avian flu, 
CSM and rickettia 
Symptoms and modes of control of 
diseases which are: 
Air borne, Water related, Insect 
borne (vectors), Food contaminated 
(food poisoning), 
Nutrition related, Sexually 
transmitted, Communicable, 
Zoonotic diseases. 
20 

SHS 2 
SECTION 1: DIVERSITY OF MATTER 
   General Objectives: The students will: 
1. 
2. 
appreciate the diversity of chemical substances and their effect on matter 
recognize the variety of substances that improve soil for optimum productivity. 
UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Acids as proton donors Bases as 
proton acceptors. 
Physical and chemical properties 
of acids and bases. 
Brainstorm to bring out the definitions of acids and bases. Write word equation for 
reactions between a 
named: 
 i. Acid and metal. 
 ii. Base and 
     ammonium salt. 
UNIT: 1 
ACIDS AND 
BASES 
1.1.1 define acids and bases 
      and state their 
      properties. 
Discuss the properties and uses of acids and bases. 
perform the following chemical tests to show the properties of acids 
and bases: 
    (a) Reaction of acid and base (neutralization reaction). 
    (b) Dilute acid + metal (production of H2 gas) 
    (c) Acid + trioxocarbonate (IV) compounds (production of CO2 
                 gas). 
    (d) Reaction of a base and an ammonium salt (production of 
         NH3 gas) 
    (e) Test for hydrogen, carbon dioxide and ammonia gases. 
Describe the laboratory 
preparation of NH3 gas. 
How would you test for 
Ammonia. 
1.1.2 identify common 
      chemical substances 
      as acids or bases and 
      classify them 
      according to their 
      sources and uses. 
1.1.3 prepare salts. 
Acids and bases, e.g. Organic 
acids – vinegar, 
Organic bases - ammonia, 
Inorganic acids – dilute HCl 
Inorganic base – milk of magnesia 
Perform chemical tests to classify each chemical substance listed 
under the content as an acid or a base. 
Discuss the uses of acids and bases in everyday life and in industry, 
e.g. sodium hydroxide and tetraoxosulphate(VI) acid. 
Give two uses each of 
sodium Hydroxide 
(NaOH) and 
tetraoxosulphate (VI) 
acid (H2SO4) aq. 
Methods of preparation of salts. prepare salts using any of the following methods: 
neutralization, precipitation, acid decomposition of trioxocarbonate 
(IV) salt. 
Visit a salt/chemical industry and write a group report on the 
activities observed. Present your report to the class. 
21 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
1.1.4 describe the effect of 
      acid – base indicators. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Acid – base indicators 
describe the colours developed by phenolphthalein, litmus and 
methyl orange in aqueous solutions of dilute acids, dilute bases, 
dilute sodium chloride, distilled water and common fruit juice, e.g. 
citrus. 
discuss the use of the universal indicator and the pH-meter in the 
determination of the pH of common household chemicals, e.g. 
vinegar, palm oil, shampoo and local soap. 
use colours developed by the universal indicator to deduce the pH 
of acidic, neutral and basic solutions. 
NOTE: 
Point out the limitations of the use of the pH scale for highly 
dilute/concentrated solutions: Their pH are outside pH = 0 to pH = 
14. 
1. Explain how to 
determine the pH of a 
given solution. 
2. Which is more acidic: 
a solution of pH = 1 or a 
solution of pH = 9 
3. Explain why the use 
of universal indicator in 
determining the pH of 
solution does not work 
well with coloured 
solutions? 
1.1.5 use universal 
      indicators and the pH- 
      meter to determine 
      the pH of given 
      solutions. 
Determination of pH of given 
solutions. 
Determination of soil pH. 
UNIT: 2 
SOIL 
CONSERVATI 
ON. 
1.2.1 explain the principles 
      of soil and water 
      conservation. 
Principles of soil and water 
conservation. 
Conserving soil moisture 
Maintaining soil fertility 
describe activities to conserve soil water and maintain soil fertility 
e.g.; irrigation, mulching, addition of organic matter and crop rotation 
relate soil fertility to soil productivity 
1. Explain the concept of 
soil conservation. 
1.2.2 distinguish between 
      macro and micro 
      nutrients. 
Classification of soil nutrients into: 
Macro (major) nutrients: 
Nitrogen (N), potassium (K), 
phosphorus (P), calcium (Ca), 
magnesium (Mg), sulphur (S). 
Micro (minor) nutrients: boron (B), 
molybdenum (Mo), manganese 
(Mn), chlorine (Cl), zinc (Zn), 
copper (Cu) and iron (Fe). 
group soil nutrients into macro (major) nutrients and micro (minor) 
nutrients. 
discuss sources of nutrients, e.g. nitrogen from nitrogenous 
fertilizers such as urea and organic manure. 
2. Outline five activities 
that farmers can 
undertake to enhance 
soil productivity. 
22 

UNIT 
UNIT 2: 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
1.2.3 state the functions of 
      some soil nutrients 
      and their deficiency 
      symptoms. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Functions and deficiency 
symptoms of N, P, K, Mn, Fe. 
Identify and discuss plants having nutrient deficiency symptoms. 
NOTE: Students to refer to Nitrogen Cycle in SHS and the Carbon 
Cycle in JHS syllabuses and relate them to the maintenance of soil 
fertility. 
Maintenance of soil fertility: 
application of organic and 
inorganic manure/ fertilizers, crop 
rotation, 
cover cropping, 
liming, green manuring. 
demonstrate ways of improving soil fertility. 
demonstrate ways of preparing compost. 
Describe the deficiency 
symptoms of the 
following nutrients in 
plants: 
nitrogen, potassium and 
phosphorus. 
1.2.4 describe methods of 
      maintaining soil 
      fertility. 
1.2.5 outline factors which 
      lead to the depletion 
      of soil nutrients. 
Factors which lead to the 
depletion of soil nutrients: 
1. Erosion 
2. Overgrazing 
3. Poor farming and tillage 
   methods, 
4. Dumping of non- 
   biodegradable waste on land 
5. Improper irrigation and 
   drainage practices. 
6. Surface mining and quarrying. 
7. Deforestation. 
8. Excessive use of fertilizer 
discuss how the factors listed under content lead to the depletion of 
soil nutrients. 
NOTE: 
Detailed discussion of erosion is not required. 
PROJECT 
Design a model of a farm to illustrate the harvesting of runoff water 
for irrigation. 
Outline the various 
processes involved in 
compost preparation. 
Outline three effects of 
soil erosion on soil 
productivity 
23 

UNIT 
UNIT: 3 
WATER 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
 refer to JHS syllabus for a review of sources of water, physical 
and chemical properties of water and the treatment of hard and 
soft water. 
perform experiments to investigate properties of water: 
    (i)demonstrate the solvent action of water on a 
             variety of substances. 
    (ii)determine the presence of dissolved substances 
             in some sources of water 
    (iii)demonstrate the polar nature of water. 
NOTE: 
discussion should include uses of water. 
Explain what an aqueous solution is 
and give three examples. 
1.3.2 distinguish between 
      hard and soft water. 
Hardness and softness of 
water. 
Advantages and 
disadvantages of hard and 
soft water. 
collect water from different sources and determine their 
hardness using the same brand of soap. 
discuss the advantages and the disadvantages of hard and soft 
water. 
Name two compounds 
which cause permanent 
hardness of water and two 
compounds which cause 
temporary hardness of 
water. 
Name two advantages and 
disadvantages of hard 
and soft water. 
two 
1.3.3 demonstrate how to 
      soften water. 
Softening hard water. demonstrate through an activity any one of the following 
processes to soften hard water: 
addition of washing soda, ion exchange, boiling and distillation. 
draw a flow chart to show the steps involved in the treatment of 
water for public consumption 
discuss the importance of water as well as the role of the 
Ghana Water Company in public water supply. 
PROJECTS: 
1. Organise a visit to local water treatment plant 
   report on the visit. 
2. Design water filtration system using charcoal. 
1.3.4 describe the steps 
      involved in the 
      treatment of water for 
      public consumption. 
Treatment of water for 
public consumption 
Describe one method by which hard 
water can be softened. 
Perennial water shortage and 
frequent disruptions in water supply 
in most communities in Ghana can 
be traced to erosion of human 
values. Discuss. 
Outline the role of Ghana Water 
Company in the control of water 
supplies in cities, towns and 
villages. 
List two significance of the use of 
charcoal in filtering water. 
and write a 
24 

SHS 2 
SECTION 2: CYCLES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
                          General Objectives: The students will: 
recognize that there are repeated patterns of change in nature and understand how these patterns arise. 
be aware of the natural distribution of the earth‟s water and the need to conserve water for plant and animal use. 
appreciate the importance of animal production to humans. 
become aware of the production cycle of some animals 
recognise the need to apply scientific principles in the rearing of animals 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
HYDROLOGIC 
AL CYCLE 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Distribution of the earth‟s water: 
Groundwater 
Surface water (fresh water 
marine water) 
discuss where earth‟s water is located and how much of it is 
available for human use. 
NOTE: 
Percentage distribution of water on the earth‟s surface to be 
mentioned 
discuss the processes involved in the hydrological cycle using 
appropriate diagrams. 
2.1.1 explain the distribution 
      of the earth‟s water. 
Draw a hydrological 
cycle and comment on 
its importance to plants 
and animals. 
2.1.2 explain the relevance 
      of the hydrological 
      cycle to plants and 
      animals. 
2.1.3 outline the main 
      sources of water 
      contamination and the 
      effects on humans 
Relevance of hydrological cycle 
Main sources of water 
contamination: domestic waste, 
commercial waste, industrial and 
mining waste, agricultural waste, 
radioactive waste, and “special” 
waste such as waste from 
hospitals. 
 Effects of water contamination: 
water-related diseases and 
infections. 
discuss the various sources of water contamination to include items 
listed under content. 
discuss the effects such as water-related diseases under the 
following headings: 
water-borne, water-washed, water-based and insect based 
diseases. 
gather more information on the topic using search engines from 
internet sites 
Give one example each 
of the following water- 
related diseases: 
(i) water-washed 
(ii) water-borne 
(iii) water-based 
Discuss the importance 
of rainwater harvesting 
25 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able 
to: 
2.1.4 describe 
      household water 
      conservation 
      methods. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Water conservation methods Discuss household water treatment, waste water treatment, safe 
water storage, modern and traditional rainwater harvesting systems. 
PROJECT: 
1. Gather information on modern and traditional rainwater 
   harvesting system from the following sources: 
  i. interviewing people in the community, 
   ii. library, websites and scientific journals 
2. Design a simple water harvesting technique or a domestic water 
  reuse system. 
UNIT: 1 
HYDROLOGICAL 
CYCLE(CONT’D) 
UNIT 2 
GENERAL 
PRINCIPLES OF 
FARM ANIMAL 
PRODUCTION. 
2.2.1 outline the main 
      activities involved 
      in the production of 
      farm animals. 
Main activities involved 
in farm animal production. 
Selection of suitable breeds. 
Choice of management system: 
Breeding systems and care of the 
young. 
Management practices including 
animal health care and feeding. 
Finishing, processing and 
marketing of produce 
Visit a nearby livestock farm or a commercial livestock enterprise to 
investigate and report on the following: 
i. Main activities carried out 
ii. Management system in use. 
iii. Breeding/animal improvement procedures 
iv. Feeding procedures 
v. Pest, parasite and disease control 
vi. Marketing of animal products. 
Outline five 
management practices 
used on a poultry farm. 
2.2.2. describe ruminant 
       production. 
Ruminant production: 
cattle/goats/sheep 
discuss goat/cattle/sheep production under the items listed under 
SRN 2.2.1: 
Types of breeds and their characteristic, management practices, 
breeding systems,common pests and diseases, 
marketing of products etc. 
Describe three different 
management systems 
for keeping farm 
animals. 
List one advantage and 
one disadvantage of 
each system. 
Explain three 
management practices 
that are used to control 
and prevent diseases 
and pests in farm 
animals 
2.2.3 describe non 
      ruminant 
      production. 
Production of non-ruminants: 
poultry/pigs/rabbits 
follow main activities outlined in SRN 2.1.1 to produce a non- 
ruminant farm animal. 
26 

SHS 2 
SECTION 3: SYSTEMS 
1. 
2. 
                          General Objectives: The students will: 
recognize that a system is a whole consisting of parts that work together to perform a function. 
recognize the processes of excretion, reproduction, and transportation of substances in living organisms as life systems. 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
EXCRETORY 
SYSTEM 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
3.1.1 explain the meaning 
      of excretion 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Excretion in mammals Brainstorm to bring out the meaning of excretion. 
discuss to bring out the differences between excretion and egestion 
Distinguish between 
excretion and egestion 
in humans. 
3.1.2  identify organs of the 
excretory system and 
their products in 
mammals. 
Organs of excretory system and 
their products. 
discuss the main organs of excretory system (lungs, skin, liver and 
kidneys) and match them against their products 
NOTE: 
 1. Excretory products of liver should include bile pigment, urea and 
     cholesterol. 
 2. Discussion to include: 
i. Structure of the skin and kidneys(Structure of nephron not 
     required) 
ii. How the products of excretion ( sweat and urine) are eliminated 
     from the body after their formation. 
iii. Excretory product of liver should include bile, cholesterol and 
     pigment. 
List three excretory 
organs and their 
respective products 
3.1.3 mention some 
      disorders of the 
      urinary system in 
      humans and their 
      remedies. 
Disorders of urinary system in 
humans. 
Discuss the disorders of the human urinary system e.g. bed wetting, 
urine retention, kidney stones and their remedies. 
27 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Structure and function of the 
mammalian reproductive 
system. 
Annotate a diagram of a dissected small male and female mammal 
(e.g. guinea pig, rabbit); showing the reproductive systems. 
Identify a diagram of the 
organs of the male and 
female reproductive 
systems of humans on a 
chart. 
UNIT: 2 
REPRODUCTIVE 
SYSTEM AND 
GROWTH IN 
MAMMALS 
3.2.1 identify the 
       reproductive organs 
       of a mammal and 
       their functions. 
3.2.2 state the advantages 
      and disadvantages of 
      male and female 
      circumcision. 
3.2.3 outline the processes 
      leading to fertilization, 
      zygote development 
      and birth in humans. 
Male and female circumcision. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of circumcision. 
NOTE: 
Pay particular attention to the dangers of female circumcision. 
Fertilization, development of 
the zygote (pregnancy) and 
birth in humans. 
Discuss the process of fertilization, development of zygote 
(pregnancy) and birth using charts, models and diagrams. 
NOTE: 
Discussion to include: formation of twins: 
1. Identical, fraternal and Siamese. 
2. Details of cell division and anatomy of the embryo not 
     required. 
Explain the formation of 
identical, fraternal and 
Siamese twins. 
3.2.4 identify the problems 
       associated with 
       reproduction in 
       humans. 
Problems associated with 
reproduction in humans: 
Miscarriage, 
ectopic pregnancy, 
infertility, 
impotence, 
fibroid, 
disease infections 
ovarian cyst. 
Sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs): 
HIV/AIDS, gonorrhea, herpes, 
Chlamydia, syphilis candidiasis 
(white/trash). 
Mode of transmission 
Effects: 
prolonged sickness, infertility 
discuss problems associated with reproduction in humans as listed 
under content. Causes of infertility in both males and females to be 
discussed as well as illegal abortion. 
CASE STUDY: 
A childless couple thinks their problem is due to witchcraft. Use 
scientific method and reasoning to explain the possible causes of 
the infertility. 
State one cause of each 
of the following: 
1. ectopic pregnancy 
2. infertility 
3. fibroid 
4. impotence 
3.2.5 mention types of STIs 
     including HIV/AIDS, 
     how they are 
     transmitted and their 
     effects. 
Discuss various sexually transmitted diseases and their modes of 
transmission. 
Analyse the effects of STIs including HIV/AIDS on the health and 
reproduction in humans. 
Discuss the effects of 
HIV/AIDS on the family 
and the society. 
28 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
3.2.6 identify the phases of 
     growth and 
     development in 
     humans and the 
     associated changes. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Phases of growth and 
development in humans. 
Discuss the various phases of growth and the physical and 
behavioural changes associated with each phase of human 
development. 
NOTE: 
The changes may include losing milk teeth and development of 
permanent teeth, increase in mass, height, development of 
secondary sexual characters, e.g. menstruation in girls (pre- 
menstrual syndrome (PMS) in some women- accompanied by 
violent moods or depression), wet dreams in boys. Changes in old 
age should include menopause and its associated problems. 
invite a psychologist and gynaecologist to talk about changes during 
adolescence and symptoms associated with menopause. 
Discuss the 
development of 
secondary sexual 
characteristics in males 
and females 
UNIT: 3 
THE 
CIRCULATORY 
SYSTEM 
3.3.1 describe the structure 
      and functions of the 
      circulatory system of 
      humans. 
Structure and functions of the 
circulatory system of humans. 
Use charts/models/diagrams/video clip/digitized content to trace the 
flow of blood through the heart, the lungs and the body of humans. 
NOTE: 
1. Detailed structure of the blood vessels not required 
2. Relate it osmosis and diffusion in plants 
Discuss the functions of 
the heart, the veins and 
the arteries 
in the circulatory system. 
3.3.2 describe the 
     composition and 
     functions of blood. 
Composition and functions of 
blood. 
Discuss the composition and functions of the blood(transport, 
defense and support) 
NOTE: 
1. Discussion should not include the mechanism of blood clotting. 
2. Functions of blood should be discussed under: transport, defense 
   and support. 
CLASS ACTIVITY: 
Carry out activities using the appropriate equipment to measure 
their own blood pressure 
Explain the causes of disorders of the circulatory system in humans. 
NOTE: 
Invite a resource person to give talk on the disorders of the 
circulatory system of humans. 
List the two main 
components of the 
blood. 
State three functions of 
the blood. 
3.3.3 identify disorders 
       associated with the 
       blood circulatory 
       system of humans. 
Disorders associated with the 
circulatory system: high blood 
pressure, low blood pressure, 
hole-in-heart, leukemia, anaemia 
List three disorders 
associated with the 
human circulatory 
system. 
29 

SHS 2 
SECTION 4: ENERGY 
General Objectives: The student will: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
recognize that energy has a source, can be transferred and can be transformed into various forms 
become aware of the various forms of energy such as electrical and sound energy and their uses 
appreciate the behaviour of the components of an electronic circuit. 
appreciate the use of nuclear energy as an alternate source of energy. 
UNIT 
UNIT 1 
ELECTRICAL 
ENERGY 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
4.1.1 describe static and 
     current electricity. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Nature of static and current 
electricity. 
Comb dry hair with plastic comb and use it to collect bits of tissue 
paper and explain the phenomenon. 
Explain that the formation of lightning is based on electrostatics. 
discuss protection of buildings and installations from lightning strikes 
using lightning arrestors 
Sources of and static current 
electricity. 
state sources of current electricity. 
Discuss differences between a.c and d.c. 
Explain in terms of 
electron movement what 
happens when a plastic 
comb is used to rub the 
hair. 
4.1.2 name the various 
     components of electric 
     circuits and and state 
     their functions. 
Simple electric circuits: 
Series and parallel arrangements 
of components. 
Draw a simple electric circuit and discuss the functions of each 
component. 
Connect the components of a simple circuit in series and parallel 
and explain their advantages and disadvantages. 
state the functions of the 
following components of 
an electric circuit; 
     1. Battery 
     2. Switch 
     3. Resistor 
30 

UNIT 
UNIT 1 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
4.1.3 calculate resistance, 
      current, potential 
      difference and power. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Resistance (R),current (I), 
potential difference (V) and power 
(P) 
state Ohm‟s law and carry out simple calculations using the relation 
V = IR 
Carry out simple calculations for electric power. 
Resistors 2Ω and 6Ω are 
connected in (i) parallel 
and 
(ii) series to a 1.5 V cell. 
Calculate the current 
flowing in each 
arrangement 
An electric appliance is 
rated 240V, 750W. 
Calculate 
(i) the current 
(ii) the resistance 
               V2 
P IV I R 
                R 
State power ratings (wattage) of some electrical devices, e.g. stove 
750W and bulbs 40W, 60W, 
2 
Discuss the importance of power ratings of electric appliances. 
Discuss the importance of the use of energy saving electrical 
appliance. 
4.1. 4 identify the sources of 
      electric power 
       generation. 
Sources of electric power 
generation. 
Discuss the effect of electric power rationing on electrical 
appliances. 
discuss sources of electric power generation: 
Hydro, thermal, nuclear, solar, wind, tidal and biogas. 
PROJECT: 
i. Visit a thermal/hydro-electric power station and write report. 
Power transmission: 
Transformers 
(step up and step down 
transformers). 
4.1.5 describe the stages of 
      electric power 
      transmission. 
Wiring a plug 
Household wiring 
Stabilizers, fuses and 
Earthing. 
discuss the gadgets and processes involved in the transmission of 
power under the following headings: 
    1. Use of step up and step down transformer. 
    2. Wiring of a plug. 
    3. Household wiring. 
    4. Use of stabilizers. 
    5. Use of fuse. 
    6. Use of earthing. 
Discuss how electric 
power reaches your 
home from a hydro- 
electric power station 
(Akosombo). 
31 

SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 
UNIT 
The student will be able to: 
UNIT: 2 
ELECTRONICS 
4.2.1 classify solid materials 
      into conductors, 
      insulators and semi 
      conductors. 
4.2.2 explain the formation of 
      P-type and N-type 
      semi conductors 
4.2.1 describe the formation 
      of a P-N junction diode. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Conductors, insulators and semi 
conductors 
discuss conductors insulators and semiconductors 
P-type and N-type semi 
     conductors 
discuss the formation of P-type and N-type semi conductors 
P-N junction diode formation. 
Doping 
observe a P-N junction diode 
Discuss the formation of a P-N junction diode. 
Explain the behaviour of the diode when it is ON(forward bias). 
Explain the behaviour of the diode when it is OFF(reverse bias). 
Connect a 3.0V battery, a switch, an LED and a P-N junction diode 
in series. Switch on the circuit and observe the behavior of the LED. 
Reverse the position of the P-N junction diode and observe the 
behavior of the LED. 
Describe the behaviour 
of a loud speaker in an 
amplifier circuit when 
(i) the switch is closed 
(ii) the switch is opened. 
4.2.2 explain the behaviour 
      of a P-N junction diode 
      in a d.c. and a.c 
      electronic circuits. 
Behaviour of a P-N junction 
diode 
Rectification. 
UNIT: 3 
SOUND 
ENERGY 
Explain half wave Rectification. 
4.3.1 explain the sources 
      and nature of sound. 
Sources of sound. produce sound from different instruments (pipes, rods or strings and 
percussions) 
discuss reflection and refraction of sound 
discuss differences in velocity of sound in gas, liquid, solid and 
vacuum. 
NOTE: 
1. Discussion should include formation of echoes. 
2. Determination of the velocity of sound is not required. 
Nature of sound: velocity, 
reflection, refraction. 
How is sound produced 
by the following musical 
instruments: 
(i) pipes, 
(ii) strings, 
(iii) percussion. 
State three facts about 
the nature of sound 
energy. 
32 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
4.3.2 describe musical 
      notes and distinguish 
      musical notes from 
      noise. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Musical notes and noise. Produce different sounds and classify them as musical notes or 
noise. 
Explain pitch, loudness and quality of musical notes. 
NOTE: 
Teacher to mention that loudness of sound is measured in decibels. 
Compare notes produced by different types of musical instruments 
in terms of pitch, loudness and quality. 
Let students: 
Describe the human ear and the functions of each part. 
Discuss the effect of loudness and pitch on humans e.g. sound 
pollution. 
Discuss the importance of ear muffs. 
4 3.3 identify the parts of 
      the human ear and 
      describe their 
      functions. 
Structure and functions of the 
human ear. 
Differentiate between: 
i. Pitch and loudness 
ii. Loudness and quality 
of sound 
What is the effect of high 
pitch sound on humans? 
UNIT 4 
NUCLEAR 
ENERGY 
4.4.1 describe the nature of 
      radioactivity 
Radioactivity Discuss the causes of nuclear instability and how they emit radiation 
to become stable. 
Mention types of radiation (alpha particles, beta particles and 
gamma rays). 
4.4.2 describe the nature 
      and uses of 
      radioisotopes 
4.4.3 state the uses of 
      nuclear energy 
4.4.4 outline ways for 
      protecting people from 
      the effects of 
      radioactivity 
Nature and uses of radioisotopes Discuss the nature, production and use of radioisotopes: food 
preservation, sterilization of equipment, treatment of diseases, pest 
control and crop improvement etc. 
Discuss uses of nuclear energy e.g. in the production of electricity, 
Name the three 
radiations emitted during 
radioactivity. Compare 
the radiations under the 
following headings: 
(i) mass 
(ii) charge 
(iii) penetrating power. 
Uses of nuclear energy 
Protection from the effects of 
radioactivity. 
Problems associated with nuclear 
 waste disposal. 
Use charts/video clips to discuss the harmful effects of radioactivity 
and how to protect people from the effects e.g. atomic bombs. 
Discuss the problems associated with the disposal of nuclear waste 
33 

SHS 2 
               YEAR 2 
SECTION 5: INTERACTIONS OF MATTER 
1. 
2, 
3. 
4. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
                          General Objectives: The Students will: 
appreciate that interaction between and within matter helps humans to better understand the environment and their role in it 
understand the principles of operation of magnets, forces and motion of objects 
recognise the importance of proper sanitation in communities for healthy living 
be aware of safety precautions at the community and to prevent hazards 
understand the working of simple machines and how to maintain them. 
become aware of existing endogenous technology and possible ways for improvement. 
be aware of modern technology and how it has caused great improvement in our way of living. 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
MAGNETISM 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
5.1.1 distinguish between 
      magnetic and non 
      magnetic materials. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Magnetic and non- 
magnetic materials. 
Move magnets closer to various kinds of materials and classify them as: 
magnetic and non-magnetic materials. 
discuss permanent and temporary magnet 
Name five each of 
common household 
items that are: 
i. magnetic 
ii. non-magnetic 
    materials. 
5.1.2 distinguish between 
      permanent and 
      temporary magnet and 
      their uses 
Types of magnet and their 
uses 
Explore the uses of magnets in everyday life e.g. 
Telephone earpiece 
Loud speakers 
Microphones 
Magnetic compass 
Generation of electricity 
Fridge doors 
Brainstorm to bring out the meaning of a magnetic field. Uuse a compass 
or iron filings to demonstrate magnetic fields around a bar magnet. 
Discuss the magnetisation of a steel bar using electrical (d.c.) method 
Discuss complete demagnetisation of a permanent magnet using a.c. 
discuss the production and uses of electromagnets. 
Explain the difference 
between permanent and 
temporary magnet. 
5.1.3 explain magnetic field. Magnetic field. 
5.1.4 describe the methods 
      of magnetisation and 
      demagnetisation. 
Magnetisation and 
demagnetisation 
Draw a magnetic field 
around a bar magnet. 
Describe how you would 
magnetise a steel bar by 
electrical method. 
34 

UNIT 
UNIT 2 
FORCE, 
MOTION 
AND 
PRESURE 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVES 
The student will be able 
to: 
5.2.1 explain force and 
      outline various 
      types. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Force: 
What it is and types: 
Frictional, 
    Viscous, 
    Gravitational, 
    Electrostatic, 
    Magnetic, 
    Upthrust 
    Tension 
    Weight 
    Push/pull 
Archimedes Principle and law 
of floatation. 
Brainstorm to define force. 
investigate the effect of force by: 
1. stretching a piece of elastic string 
2. pushing an object. 
3. stopping a moving object. 
Explain the various types of forces as listed in the content and carry out 
activities to demonstrate each one of them. 
discuss to bring out the meaning of upthrust 
discuss Archimedes principle and the law of floatation and use them to 
explain the following phenomena: 
    1. the flight of birds 
    2. why boats float in water 
GROUP ACTIVITY: 
   1. Observe and record what happens when different metallic and 
      wooden objects are placed in water. 
   2. Place a fresh egg first in water and then in concentrated salt 
      solution and explain the observation in each case. 
State three effects of 
force on a body. 
5.2.2 state the 
      Archimedes 
      Principle and the 
      law of floatation. 
Explain the term 
upthrust. 
5.2.3 explain the terms 
      distance, 
      displacement, 
      speed, velocity and 
      acceleration. 
Distance, displacement, 
speed, velocity, acceleration 
and momentum 
Brainstorm on what the following terms stand for: distance, displacement, 
speed, velocity, acceleration and momentum 
(i) speed 
dis tan ce travelled 
time taken 
; (ii) velocity 
displaceme nt 
time taken 
(iii) accelerati on 
change in velocity 
                        time taken 
Note: The above equations are not definitions. They are expressions of 
relationships 
Use the knife edge (wedge) method to determine the centre of gravity of 
rectangular, triangular and irregular shaped cardboards. 
An object of mass 4kg 
moving with initial 
                  -1 
velocity of 20ms 
accelerates for 10s and 
attains a final velocity of 
      -1 
60ms . 
Calculate the 
acceleration. 
35 

UNIT 
UNIT 2 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
5.2.4 define centre of 
       gravity and 
       distinguish between 
       stable, unstable and 
       neutral equilibrium 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
use the knife edge (wedge) 
method to determine the centre of 
gravity of rectangular, triangular 
and irregular shaped cardboards. 
demonstrate the three types of 
equilibrium using a cone on a flat 
surface. 
discuss the effect of loading a 
vehicle on the top carrier or the 
base carrier on the stability of the 
vehicle. 
Demonstrate the three types of equilibrium using a cone on a flat 
surface. 
Explain the terms 
stable, unstable and 
neutral equilibrium 
and give example of 
each type of 
equilibrium. 
Discuss the effect of loading a vehicle on the top carrier or the base 
carrier on the stability of the vehicle. 
5.2.5 define pressure and 
      describe the effects 
      and application of 
      pressure in solids, 
      liquids and gases. 
Pressure; definition and effects. Brainstorm to define pressure 
perform simple calculations using the formula: 
Pr essure = 
Force 
Area 
Use a rectangular block of wood to demonstrate the effect of surface 
area on pressure exerted by solids 
Use a tall container with three holes at different heights to 
demonstrate pressure in liquids. 
Use bicycle pump to demonstrate the transmission of pressure in 
gases. 
Observe the operation of siphons. 
CLASS PROJECT: 
Students to design a simple fountain or sprinkler system. 
Explain the danger 
associated with loading 
the top carriers of 
vehicle heavy. 
A cement block of 
weight 50.0N and one 
                  2 
side of area 0.2m rests 
on a table. Calculate 
the pressure exerted on 
the table by the cement 
block 
36 

UNIT 
UNIT 3 
SAFETY IN 
THE 
COMMUNITY 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
5.3.1 identify appliances 
      used at home and 
      how to use them 
      properly. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Safe use of appliances at 
the home. 
Discuss proper use or handling of household appliances to prevent 
accidents at home: avoidance of overloading of electric sockets, extreme 
care in using the heating coil in metal/plastic containers, use of gas 
stoves. 
NOTE: Precautions to include: 
1. Keeping hands dry before touching electrical gadgets. 
2. Viewing television from a distance. 
3. Viewing television in a dark room. 
Demonstrate the following using models: 
     1. mouth-to-mouth resuscitation method. 
     2. methods of extinguishing different fires. 
     3. treatment of burns, cuts and electric shocks. 
Invite a Fire Service Officer or Red Cross Personnel to talk to class on 
accidents prevention and first aid. 
ACTIVITY: Students to make a first aid box for the class. 
Discuss possible hazards that can occur in any working environment, e.g. 
dust, fumes, toxic gases, corrosive substances, fire, food contamination, 
harmful radiation (x-rays), poisonous chemicals e.g. dioxins from heated 
or frozen plastics. 
Discuss the effects of hazardous substances on the human body, e.g. 
blindness, burns, nausea, vomiting, and allergies. 
Discuss various hazards, warning labels on containers and other places, 
and appraise their adequacy. 
Discuss the proper storage of some hazardous substances and other 
safety measures at work places, e.g. protective clothing. 
Discuss the techniques involved in preventing fires due to electrical and 
chemical causes, and bush fires. 
State two methods of 
extinguishing 
     1. electric fire 
     2. gas fire 
5.3.2 use first aid methods 
      to treat accidents a 
      home. 
First Aid methods 
Illustrate three safety 
symbols and state their 
meanings. 
5.3.3 identify hazardous 
     substances at the 
     work place and their 
     effects on humans. 
Hazardous substances and 
their effect. 
5.3.4 identify some common 
      hazards in the 
      community 
Common hazards in the 
community: 
Diseases, pests and 
parasites outbreak. 
Discuss the general effects of the hazards on humans. 
37 

SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 
UNIT 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
Insanitary conditions, 
problems of waste 
generation and pollution 
Traffic problems in towns 
and cities. 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
5.3.5 outline the role of 
      organizations working to 
      improve the health of 
      mankind and the factors 
      which promote Public 
      Health. 
The role of Health Service 
Organizations. 
Public Health and 
Sanitation. 
Public Education. 
Discuss the functions of health organisations such as Ghana Health 
Service, Red Cross, Red Crescent, Blue Cross, WHO, FAO, 
UNICEF, UNFPA, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Ghana 
Standards Board, Food and Drugs Board. 
Discuss the factors that promote public health; e.g. siting of refuse 
dumps, provision of waste disposal facilities, cleaning and desilting 
of gutters, proper house planning to improve ventilation, efficient 
town planning and village planning systems (with water supply), 
places of garbage disposal, good clean roads and street 
connections 
Discuss the implications of expiry dates on consumable items e.g. 
food and medicine. 
Justify the need for education in the promotion of good health. 
Discuss the importance of proper sanitation in disease control. 
NOTE: 
Emphasize that improper sanitation and hygiene problem in 
communities can best be solved through co-operation, team spirit 
and civic responsibility of the people and not by health workers 
alone. 
Describe the functions of 
EPA, Ghana Health 
Services and WHO. 
Outline how sanitation 
and hygiene education 
can promote good 
health. 
Discuss the role of 
human values in 
sanitation and hygiene 
education. 
UNIT 4: 
ENDOGENOUS 
TECHNOLOGY 
5.4.1 outline the inter- 
      dependency of science 
      and technology. 
Inter-dependency of science 
 and technology 
Discuss how science and technology depend on each other to 
solve societal problems: communication, transportation, health, 
nutrition etc. Gather more information on the topic from the 
internet.. 
Explain, with examples, 
how science and 
technology have helped 
to improve the living 
standards of human kind 
38 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
5.4.2 explain the term 
      endogenous 
      technology. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Meaning of endogenous 
technology 
Discuss the meaning of endogenous technology. 
Discuss the effects of modern technology on the development of 
endogenous technology in Ghana. 
Discuss some small industries in Ghana in terms of raw materials, 
equipment and market. 
5.4.3 identify the scientific 
      principles underlying 
      the operations of 
      some small scale 
      industries. 
Small scale industries: 
Soap making, 
Vegetable Oil Extraction, 
Shea Butter/Palm Oil 
Extraction, 
Bread Making, 
Salt Extraction, 
Pomade Making, 
Herbal Medicine extraction. 
Scientific basis of some 
 industries. 
Discuss the scientific processes involved in the following industries 
e.g. 
i. salt making – evaporation, crystallization/recrystallization, 
ii. soap production – decolorization, saponification using soda ash or 
    caustic potash solution, precipitation(salting-out) 
iii. palm oil production – collection and fermentation, pulp 
     production, extraction of fruit juice, separation of oil 
iv. yoghurt production - mixing of raw materials, homogenization, 
    pasteurization (flash process), cooling, storage/packaging. 
UNIT 5 
BIOTECHNOLOGY 
5.5.1 explain the term 
      Biotechnology. 
Meaning of Biotechnology. Brainstorm to bring out the meaning of bio-technology. 
NOTE: 
Explanation to include application of genetic engineering, reactions 
of enzymes, hormones, and microbes in industry. 
Discuss the importance 
of microbes in food 
processing in Ghana. 
5.5.2 give examples of 
      industries based on 
      biotechnology. 
5.5.3 explain the meaning 
      of genetic engineering 
      and list examples of 
      its applications. 
Examples of industries 
 based on biotechnology 
Give examples of industries based on biotechnology e.g. yeasts for 
bread making and brewing, Penicillium sp .for manufacture of 
drugs (penicillin), Lactobacillus sp. for yoghurt, cheese. 
Discuss the meaning of genetic engineering and its application in 
agriculture to produce high yielding and disease resistant crops, 
genetically modified foods. 
Genetic engineering. 
39 

UNIT 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The students will be able to: 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
NOTE: 
Genetic engineering is used to alter the nature of genes. 
5.5.4 explain the term 
      tissue culture and 
      give examples of its 
      application. 
Tissue culture and its 
 application. 
Visit a tissue culture laboratory and observe how healthy plants can be 
produced from tissues obtained from parts of a plant, e.g., leaves, storage 
organs, meristematic tissues, etc. 
NOTE: 
1. Examples of places to visit: Ghana Atomic Energy Commission, Accra. 
    Universities, Crop Research Institute – Kumasi, Cocoa research Institute 
    of Ghana(CRIG)-Tafo, Plant Genetic Research Institute-Bunsu 
2. Visit internet site to gather information on biotechnology and report. 
Discuss the importance 
of tissue culture in 
agriculture 
UNIT 6: 
WORK AND 
MACHINES 
5.6.1 explain work, energy 
      and power. 
Work, energy and power. Brainstorm to define work, energy and power 
discuss the work done when: 
i. a load is lifted up from the ground on the head. 
ii. a load is carried on the head along a horizontal distance 
iii. drawing water from a well using bucket and rope. 
Review potential and kinetic energy from JHS syllabus. 
5.6.2 identify simple 
      machines. 
Simple machines, such as 
levers, pulleys, wheel and 
axle and inclined planes. 
Mechanical advantage, 
velocity ratio and 
efficiency of machines. 
Discuss how some simple machines e.g. scissors, hammer, secateurs, 
cutlass, wheel barrow, make work easier. 
A stone is dropped from 
a tall building 100m 
high. 
Discuss the changes in 
energy that takes place 
before the stone 
reaches the ground. 
List the three classes of 
levers and give one 
example each. 
5.6.3 explain the terms 
      mechanical 
      advantage, velocity 
      ratio and efficiency of 
      machines. 
5.6.4 explain the effects of 
      friction and methods 
      of reducing friction in 
      machines. 
Discuss mechanical advantage, velocity ratio and efficiency. 
NOTE: Only simple treatments of these terms are required. 
Explain why the 
efficiency of a machine 
is less than 100%. 
State the advantages 
and disadvantages of 
friction in every day life. 
Effects of friction and 
methods of reducing the 
effects:- use of ball 
bearings and lubricants. 
Discuss various ways of reducing friction in machines. 
Discuss how friction is reduced in machines. 
40 

SHS 3 
SECTION 1: DIVERSITY OF MATTER 
General Objectives: The students will: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
recognize the variety of materials around us in the form of metals, semi-metals and non-metals and their uses. 
be aware of the effect of the environment on mineral exploitation. 
recognize the variety of organic and inorganic compounds around us, their properties and uses 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
METALS AND 
NON- METALS 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
1.1.1 classify chemical 
      elements into metals, 
      semi-metals and non- 
      metals and relate 
      them to their physical 
      and chemical 
      properties. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Classification of elements into 
metals, semi-metals and non- 
metals and their properties. 
Collect various materials and classify them as follows: 
    metals 
    semi-metals (metalloids) 
    non-metals 
Discuss the physical properties of metals, semi-metals and non- 
metals under conductivity, lustre, malleability, ductility, sonority, 
tensile strength. 
Uses of metals, semi-metals and 
non-metals. 
Discuss the uses of metals, semi-metals and non-metals. 
Discuss the application of semi-metals. 
tabulate the uses of the following elements: 
 Al, Cu, Fe, Au, C, O2, N2. 
Alloys, properties and uses. 
Steel (C and Fe) 
Brass (Cu and Zn) 
Bronze (Cu and Sn) 
Brainstorm to bring out what alloys are. 
Give examples of alloys found in the home and state their 
constituents. 
Discuss the uses of alloys. 
Discuss reasons why alloys are preferred to pure metals in the 
manufacture of certain household items (keys and cooking utensils) 
Why are alloys preferred 
to pure metals in the 
manufacture of certain 
household items? 
What are metalloids? 
Give 
 two examples. 
Give examples of 
elements which can be 
used for each of the 
following: 
i. electrical cables 
ii. construction of 
buildings 
1.1.2 relate the properties of 
      metals, non- metals 
      and semi-metals to 
      their uses in the home 
      and other places. 
1.1.3 explain what alloys 
      are, their properties 
      and uses. 
41 

UNIT 
UNIT 2 
EXPLOITATION 
OF MINERALS 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
1.2.1. outline the effects of 
       exploitation of 
       minerals on the 
       environment 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Mineral exploitation and the 
environment 
Brainstorm to bring out a list of minerals exploited in Ghana: 
Bauxite, diamond, manganese, gold and crude oil kaolin. 
Discuss the negative impact of crude oil, bauxite and gold 
exploitation on the environment and how to minimize the effect. ( 
GALAMSEY) 
NOTE: 
Use flow chart/video clip/digitized content if available to study the 
environmental degradation in some mining centres in Ghana or visit 
any mining company and report. 
Why should cyanide and 
mercury be used with 
caution in the extraction 
of gold? 
UNIT 3: 
RUSTING 
1.3.1. explain the process 
       of rusting. 
Rusting: 
Process of rusting 
Perform experiment to show that air and water are necessary for 
rusting of iron. 
Perform experiment to show how salt, dilute acid, dilute base and 
heat affect the rate of rusting in iron. 
List items in the home that undergo rusting. 
List the conditions 
necessary for rusting to 
occur. 
Explain why wooden 
poles are preferred to 
steel reinforced concrete 
poles in erecting 
transmission lines along 
the coast. 
Suggest an appropriate 
method of preventing 
rusting in each of the 
following: 
(i) sewing machine 
(ii) Underground steel 
      pipes. 
(iii) Food cans. 
Prevention of rusting Describe how the following processes can be used to prevent 
rusting: oiling/greasing, painting, galvanizing, tin-coating, 
electroplating, and keeping the metal dry. 
Discuss the effectiveness of various methods of preventing rusting. 
42 

UNIT 
UNIT 4 
ORGANIC 
AND 
INORGANIC 
COMPOUNDS 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
1.4.1 classify chemicals as 
      organic orinorganic 
      compounds. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Organic and Inorganic compounds Discuss the differences between organic and inorganic compounds 
with examples. 
Discuss the importance of organic chemistry in industrialization. 
Differentiate between 
organic and inorganic 
compounds. 
1.4.2 identify organic 
      compounds by their 
      functional groups. 
Organic compounds: 
Hydrocarbons, alkanols, alkanoic 
acids, alkanoates, fat and oils. 
Discuss the functional groups of given organic compounds. Write 
their structures and give examples of each. 
NOTE: 
                                                              stth 
For the hydrocarbons: (alkane, alkene and alkyne), only the 1 to 4 
members in each group should be considered. 
For the alkanols, consider only methanol, ethanol and propanol. 
For the alkanoic acids and the alkyl alkanoates consider only the 
first two members 
Discuss the properties and uses of organic compounds 
Give examples of naturally occurring organic compounds and their 
uses. 
Discuss the differences between neutralization and esterification. 
Write the functional 
groups of the following 
hydrocarbons: 
(i) alkanoic acid 
(ii) alkyne 
(iii) propanol 
1.4.4 identify sources and 
      application of 
      petrochemicals. 
Crude oil/ petroleum. 
Petrochemicals: application and 
effect on the environment. 
Outline the refinery of crude oil and the uses of the fractions. 
Discuss the uses of petrochemicals: plastics, pharmaceuticals and 
agrochemicals. 
Discuss the effects of products of petrochemicals on the 
environment. 
NOTE: 
Discussions on cracking, knocking and octane number are not 
required. 
PROJECT: 
Group students to discuss the problem of pollution as a result of 
plastic waste disposal in their communities. Teacher to guide 
students to design the re-use of plastic wastes in such areas as 
weaving, thread making, nursing of seeds, etc. 
List three fractions of 
petroleum distillation 
and state their uses. 
43 

SHS 3 
SECTION 2: CYCLES 
General Objectives: The students will: 
1. 
2 
3. 
recognize that there are repeated patterns of change in nature and understand how these patterns arise. 
recognize the life cycle of some organisms and pests. 
became aware of the production cycles of some common crops. 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
LIFE CYCLE 
OF PESTS 
AND 
PARASITES 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
2.1.1 identify some common 
      pests and parasites of 
      farm animals, crops 
      and humans. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Types of pests and parasites of 
farm animals, crops and humans. 
discuss some common pests of humans and farm animals: 
(cockroach, house fly, mosquito and tsetse fly) 
Give examples of common pests of plants, e.g. rice/maize weevils, 
beetles and stem borer. 
give examples of common endoparasites (guinea worm, tapeworm, 
liver fluke and roundworm) 
give examples of common ectoparasites (tick, louse, flea, mite and 
bed bug,) 
Distinguish between 
pests and parasites. 
2.1.2 explain the effects of 
      some common pests 
      and parasites on their 
      host. 
Effects of some common pests 
and parasites on farm animals, 
crops and humans. 
discuss some common parasites of plants:- Mistletoe, dodder, 
cassytha. 
discuss the effects of the life cycles and the effects of the following 
on their host: 
i. endoparasite: tapeworm, and guinea worm. 
ii. pests of humans (Anopheles mosquito). 
iii. malaria parasite Plasmodium, 
iv. crop pest (weevil) 
NOTE: 
Relate the control measures to the life cycles of the pests and 
parasites. 
What is the effect of 
environmental sanitation 
on the life cycle of 
mosquito? 
44 

UNIT 
UNIT: 2 
CROP 
PRODUCTION 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
2.2.1 describe general 
      principles of crop 
      production. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
General principles of crop 
production: 
i. selection of appropriate 
     varieties 
ii. site selection and land 
     preparation 
iii. method of propagation and 
     planting methods 
iv. cultural practices 
v. pests and disease control 
vi. harvesting, processing, storage 
     and marketing 
Discuss the general principles of a crop production cycle as listed in 
the content. 
Visit a crop farm or watch a film on crop production and document 
the general principles involved in crop production. 
Describe how soil and 
climate influence crop 
production. 
Outline the main cultural 
practices involved in a 
cereal crop production. 
2.2. 2 cultivate a crop up to 
       harvesting stage. 
Production of crops 
PROJECT: 
Teacher to divide class into four groups. Each group to acquire a 
piece of plot to cultivate one crop from the following crop groupings: 
Vegetable, cereals, grain legume, root or tuber crop. 
Students to apply all the principles of crop production to produce a 
crop, harvest, generate new planting materials, keep records and 
market. Students to take precautions against post harvest losses. 
NOTE: 
Production should be limited to the following crops: 
Vegetables – okro/lettuce/carrots 
Cereals – maize/millet 
Legumes - cowpea/groundnuts 
Tuber crops – cassava/yam 
Prepare a farm diary 
showing the activities 
carried out from planting 
to harvesting stage. 
45 

SHS 3 
SECTION 3: SYSTEMS 
General Objectives: The students will: 
1. 
2. 
recognize that a system is a whole consisting of parts that work together to perform a function. 
understand that the physiological processes of an organism are co-ordinated and interdependent 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
3.1.1 describe the structure 
      and functions of the 
      nervous system of 
      humans. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Structure and functions of the 
nervous system of humans. 
Discuss the structure and function of the nervous system. 
NOTE: 
Treatment should include: 
 i. Parts of the brain: fore-brain (cerebrum), mid-brain (cerebellum) and 
     hind-brain (medulla oblongata). 
ii. The spinal cord 
iii. Details of the electrical and chemical nature of impulse transmission 
     not required. 
Cause of damage to the 
central nervous system: 
accidents, diseases, 
drug/substance abuse and 
depression 
Effects of damage to the 
central nervous system. 
Discuss causes of damage to the brain and spinal cord. 
NOTE: invite a psychiatrist or mental health personnel to give a talk on 
mental health and drug/substance abuse. 
Use the future‟s wheel to explain consequences of drug/substance abuse 
on the individual, the family and the society. 
Carry out activities to identify voluntary actions e.g. walking, singing, 
writing, reading. 
Carry out activities to identify involuntary (reflex) action, e.g. knee jerk, 
blinking of the eye, heartbeat, and peristalsis. 
Annotate a diagram of the reflex arc. 
Discuss the importance of reflex action (the blinking of the eye when an 
object gets too close, sudden withdrawal of the hand when a hot object is 
touched). 
Explain what happens 
when one touches a hot 
object with the hand. 
Discuss the effects of 
drug/substance abuse 
on the youth. 
Annotate a diagram of 
the motor neurone. 
3.1.2 identify the causes 
      and effects of 
      damages to the brain 
      and spinal cord. 
3.1.3 classify stimulus 
      responses as 
      voluntary or 
      involuntary actions. 
Voluntary and Involuntary 
actions. 
46 

UNIT 
UNIT 1 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
3.1.4 describe the 
      endocrine system and 
      its functions. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Endocrine system and its 
functions. 
Discuss the endocrine system, the hormones and their functions. 
NOTE: 
Treatment should include the role of the following hormones only: 
thyroxin, adrenaline, testosterone, estrogen and insulin in the co- 
ordination of the functions under the following headings: name of 
gland producing hormones, normal functions of hormones, effect of 
over-production and under-production. 
Discuss the importance of iodated salt. 
What are hormones? 
Describe the functions of 
the following hormones 
in the body 
(i) estrogen 
(ii) adrenaline 
(iii) insulin 
47 

SHS 3 
SECTION 4: ENERGY 
1. 
2. 
                   General Objectives: The students will: 
become aware of the importance of light and heat energy. 
understand the behaviour of electronic circuit components. 
UNIT 
UNIT 1 
LIGHT 
ENERGY 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
4.1.1 review reflection and 
      refraction of light and 
      characteristics of 
      images formed by 
      plane mirrors. 
4.1.2 describe the structure 
      of human eye and its 
      functions. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Reflection, refraction and 
characteristics of images 
Review topics on reflection, refraction and characteristics of images 
from JHS syllabus 
Explain how the 
structure of the eye is 
related to its functions 
Name the type of lenses 
used to correct 
 (i) long sightedness 
(ii) short sightedness 
Structure and functions of human 
eye 
Eye defects 
Examine a model of human eye and discuss its structure in relation 
to function. 
Discuss the use of lenses to correct eye defects. 
Use glass or water prism to disperse light from the sun or electric 
bulb 
Explain the formation of rainbow. 
4.1.3 describe and explain 
      how to separate white 
      light into its 
      component colours. 
4.1.4 differentiate between 
      primary and 
      secondary colours. 
Dispersion of light. 
Primary colours– red, green, blue. 
Secondary colours– yellow, 
magenta/purple, cyan/blue-green 
demonstrate the behaviour of objects under different coloured lights 
(bulbs). 
NOTE: 
Primary and secondary colours of light are not the same as that of 
colour pigments 
Draw a ray diagram to 
show how light is 
dispersed by a triangular 
prism. 
4.1.5 outline the 
      components of the 
      electromagnetic 
      spectrum. 
Electromagnetic spectrum use a chart to explain electromagnetic spectrum 
Discuss the application of each component in the electromagnetic 
spectrum in everyday life. 
NOTE: 
Calculation and detailed treatment not required. 
State one advantage 
and one disadvantage of 
radio wave, microwave 
and UV radiation 
48 

UNIT 
UNIT: 2 
HEAT 
ENERGY 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
4.2.1 describe the nature 
      and sources of heat 
      energy. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Nature and sources of heat 
energy. 
Explain why heat is a form of energy. 
discuss sources of heat energy. 
Explain the major 
difference between heat 
and temperature. 
4.2.2 describe the modes of 
      heat transfer. 
Modes of heat transfer. Carry out activities to demonstrate conduction, convection and 
radiation of heat energy. 
Demonstrate the rate of flow of heat in a metal bar of different 
materials. 
Discuss applications of conduction, convection and radiation. (e.g. 
vacuum flask, ventilation, etc) 
4.2.3 explain the concept of 
      temperature and how 
      it is measured. 
Temperature: definition and 
measurement. 
Discuss what temperature is. 
Carry out activities/experiment to demonstrate thermal equilibrium 
between two liquids of different temperatures. 
o 
Discuss the units degree celsius ( C) and kelvin (K) in which 
temperature is expressed. 
Examine the structures of laboratory and clinical mercury –in- glass 
thermometers. 
Discuss the uses of laboratory and clinical thermometers – both 
analogue (mercury –in- glass) and digitized. 
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of mercury and alcohol 
as thermometric liquids. 
Convert the following 
                  o 
temperature from C to 
K 
           o 
(i) 245 C 
         o 
(ii) 75 C 
            o 
(iii) -112 C. 
State and explain two 
advantages of the use of 
clinical thermometer 
over laboratory 
thermometer in the 
determination of the 
temperature of a patient. 
49 

UNIT 
UNIT 2 
(CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
4.2.4 discuss the effects of 
      heat. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Thermal Expansion. Perform the ball and ring experiment to show that a body expands 
when heated. 
Heat water in a test-tube to demonstrate expansion in liquids. 
Discuss various applications of expansion e.g. thermostats, sagging 
of electric cable, bursting of inflated hot lorry tyres. 
Change of state of matter: Record the temperature of ice until it becomes a liquid, then heat the 
cold water until it boils. Note the temperatures at the various 
states/changes that the water goes through. 
Discuss the application of cooling due to evaporation, e.g., 
regulation of body temperature by the skin, cooling of water in local 
clay water pots and refrigerators. 
Use digitized content/video clip if available to investigate the effect 
of heat on changes in the state of matter. 
Explain how water in a 
clay pot becomes cold 
after standing for some 
time. 
Describe two 
applications of thermal 
expansion. 
Explain why steam from 
boiling water inflicts 
more burn than boiling 
water. 
UNIT 3 
ELECTRONIC 
       S 
4.3.1 describe the structure 
      of a transistor and 
      investigate its uses. 
Transistor and its uses. Observe an N-P-N or P-N-P transistor and identify the emitter, the 
base, and the collector. 
Discuss the application of a transistor as an amplifier and as a 
switch. 
PROJECT 
Design and construct a remote control switch using a transistor 
circuit. 
Draw the symbol of an 
N-P-N transistor. 
List two uses of a 
transistor 
50 

SHS 3 
SECTION 5: INTERACTIONS OF MATTER 
General objectives: The students will: 
1. 
2. 
appreciate that interaction between and within matter helps humans to better understand the environment and their role in it. 
appreciate inheritance as a characteristic of variation. 
UNIT 
UNIT: 1 
VARIATION, 
INHERITANCE 
. 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
5.1.1 relate the nucleus, 
      chromosomes and 
      genes as a sequence 
      in inheritance. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Chromosomes and genes. Discuss chromosomes as bearers of genes/hereditary materials and 
recessive and dominant characters; genotype and phenotype. 
Discuss inheritance of a single pair of contrasting characters e.g. 
height (tallness and shortness) up to the second filial generation. 
NOTE: Simple treatment of inheritance (Mendel‟s first law of 
inheritance) and DNA test are required. 
Discuss the application of the sequence of inheritance with respect 
to cloning and stem cells. 
Discuss some heritable and non heritable characters in humans. 
Explain the following 
terms: 
(i) gene 
(ii) genotype 
(iii) phenotype 
(iv) dominant character. 
(v) recessive character 
5.1.2 explain the causes 
      and consequences of 
      variation. 
Variation: 
Meaning, causes and 
consequences. 
Brainstorms to bring out the meaning of variation. 
Discuss the causes and consequences of variation. e.g. production 
of animal and crop breeds and varieties. 
Measure heights or weights of their peers in class to illustrate 
variation in humans. 
Observe grain colours in maize to illustrate variation in plants. 
NOTE: Mutation should be mentioned as one of the causes of 
variation e.g. resistance of some organisms to drugs or chemicals, 
albinism in humans. 
What is a hybrid? 
51 

UNIT 
UNIT 1 
VARIATION, 
INHERITANCE 
. 
  (CONT’D) 
 SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVE 
The student will be able to: 
5.1.3 explain how sex is 
      determined in 
      humans. 
CONTENT 
TEACHING AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
EVALUATION 
Let students: 
Sex determination 
Sex-linked characters 
Explain how sex is determined at fertilization. 
Discuss how sex preference of children can affect family relationship 
and size. 
Discuss some sex-linked characters. 
How is sex determined 
in humans? 
5.1.4 discuss the 
      inheritance of the 
      various blood groups 
      and Rh-factor and 
      outline their 
      importance. 
Blood Groups and Rhesus factor. 
Inheritance of Blood groups and 
Rh-factor and its practical 
application. 
Discuss types of blood groups and Rhesus factor, and their 
importance for marriage, blood transfusion and paternity test. 
Discuss the inheritance of blood groups and Rh-factor. 
Discuss problems in marriage due to incompatible Rh-factor and 
how to avoid these problems. 
Name the types of blood 
groups and Rh-factor in 
humans. 
5.1.5 explain how sickle cell 
      gene is inherited and 
      sickle cell disease is 
      acquired. 
Sickle cell gene 
Sickle cell disease 
Discuss how the sickle cell gene is inherited. 
Discuss how the sickle cell disease is acquired. 
Discuss how sickle cell disease could be managed. 
NOTE: 
Counseling against marriage between sicklers should be stressed. 
Explain why it is 
important that couples 
should know their 
sickling and their Rh- 
factor status before 
marriage. 
What is the genotype of 
one with sickle cell 
disease? 
52 

 
REFERENCES: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Williams, Principles of nuclear Chemistry 
Harvey, Introduction to Nuclear Physics and Chemistry. 
GAST, Integrated Science for Senior High Schools 
Peter Asiedu & Charles Amoako, Integrated Science for Senior High Schools 
Peter Asiedu & Henric Atta Baah-Yeboah, Integrated Science Practical Work for Senior High School 
Ministry of Health(Ghana), Regenerative Health & Nutrition; Healthy Lifestyle: Facilitator‟s Guide 
A.K.B Obeng, Prof Mrs Monney, Prof Sampson Ekuban; Integrated Science for Senior High Schools 
Sandra Gottfried & Gerald Skoog, PrenticeHall Biology 
 
 
 
Visit www.Larnedu.com for WASSCE / WAEC Syllabus on different subjects. Larnedu also provides lots of 
resources and information that will enable you to ace the WASSCE.  
Good luck! 
53