ECONOMICS 
                                                                                                                                                                 
PREAMBLE 
                                                                                                                                             
This  syllabus  is  designed  to  assess  candidates’  knowledge  of  basic  economic  principles 
needed  for  rational  decision  making  relating  to  individuals,  businesses,  government  and 
society.  Such  knowledge  is  necessary  in  enhancing  their  appreciation  of  government 
economic policies, problems of implementation and how they impact on the economy.  This 
will help candidates to understand that economics is not only an academic field of study but 
also a practical subject. 
                                                                                                         
 OBJECTIVES  
  
The syllabus will test candidates’ 
                                                                                                                     
1.     knowledge  of  the  basic  economic  principles,  concepts,  and  the  tools  for  economic 
analysis; 
 
2.     understanding of the structure and functioning of economic institutions – commercial, 
agricultural, industrial and financial institutions; 
 
3.     understanding of the basis for rational economic decisions; 
 
4.     ability to explain the basis and structure of the West African economy, including the 
roles of agriculture, industry and mining and their contributions to the national 
income; 
 
5.     ability to follow the role and status of the West African countries in international 
economic relationships; 
 
6.     ability to appreciate the problems West African countries encounter in their economic 
development.                                                                                                       
    
EXAMINATION SCHEME 
There will be two papers - Paper 1 and Paper 2; both of which will be in a composite paper to 
be taken at one sitting. 
Paper 1:        will consist of fifty multiple choice questions to be taken in 1 hour for 50 
marks. 
Paper 2:        will consist of eight essay- type questions in two sections: Sections A and B.  
Section A will consist of two data response questions. Candidates will be 
required to answer four   questions in all, choosing one question from Section 
A and any three questions from Section B. The paper shall last 2 hours for 80 
marks.      
                                                                                   
         

DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 
1.     DEFINITION AND SCOPE OF ECONOMICS 
Scarcity and Choice, Scale of Preference, Opportunity Cost, Production Possibility 
Curve. Economic activities –  Production, Distribution and Consumption. 
Classification of economic activities - Primary, Secondary and Tertiary and their 
relative contributions in terms of output/income, employment, savings, investment 
and foreign exchange. 
 
2.     FACTORS OF PRODUCTION 
Land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship- meaning, characteristics and importance. 
 
3.     TYPES AND BASIC FEATURES OF ECONOMIC SYSTEMS 
 
(a) Types – capitalism, socialism and mixed economy. 
 
(b)  Basic features of each 
 
(c) Advantages and disadvantages of each 
 
(d)  Economic problems of society and the approaches for solving them under each 
of the systems. 
4.     BASIC TOOLS OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
Tables, graphs and charts.  Some basic statistical measures and representations –  
arithmetic mean, median, mode and their simple applications. 
 
5.     DEMAND     
Concept of demand and law of demand, the demand schedules and curve, reasons for 
exceptional demand curves,  types of demand (derived, composite, joint and   
competitive); factors determining demand for goods and services – price of the 
commodity,   prices of other commodities, income, tastes, price expectation, etc. 
Distinction between a shift of and movement along a demand curve; concept of 
elasticity of demand.  Types of elasticity of demand and their measurement – price, 
income and cross elasticities of demand: importance of the concept of elasticity of 
demand to consumers, producers and government. 
 
6.     SUPPLY   
 
Concept of supply and law of supply, supply schedules and curve, types of Supply – 
composite, complementary and competitive. Factors determining supply – input 
prices, technology, prices of other commodities, climatic factors, etc.  Distinction 
between the shift of and movement along the supply curve. Concept and measurement 
of elasticity of supply and its importance to producers and government 
 
 
 

7.     THEORY OF CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR 
 
The utility concepts- total utility, average utility, marginal utility and the calculation 
of utility schedules. The law of diminishing marginal utility, relationship between 
total utility, average utility and marginal utility. The concept of equilibrium of a 
consumer. Determination of consumer equilibrium. The effects of   changes in price 
on consumer   equilibrium. The relationship between marginal utility and the demand 
curve. 
 
 8.     THEORY OF PRICE DETERMINATION 
The Concept of the market; interaction between demand and supply. Price 
determination under free and regulated markets. Equilibrium price and quantity in 
product and factor markets. The effects of changes in supply and demand on 
equilibrium prices and quantities. Introduction to algebraic determination of 
equilibrium price and quantity. Price controls: maximum and minimum price 
regulations- meaning and their effects; rationing, black market (parallel market) 
                                                                                                                   
 
9.      THEORY OF PRODUCTION 
 
Production: division of labour and specialization: Scale of production (Internal and 
External economies), concept of total, average and marginal productivity and law of 
variable  proportions. 
 
10.       THEORY OF COST AND REVENUE 
 
 (i)     Cost concepts: total cost, average cost, marginal cost, variable cost, fixed cost;  
      short run and long run costs. 
 
           (ii)    Distinction between economist’s and accountant’s view of cost  
        (opportunity cost and money cost). 
 
           (iii)     Revenue concepts: total, average and marginal revenue; Marginal revenue 
        Product                      
. 
11.      MARKET STRUCTURES 
 
    Concept of a market, characteristics of various market structures, determination of  
    price and output under different structures - perfect competition and   imperfect 
    competition (monopoly and monopolistic competition). Review of cost and revenue  
    concepts.  Price discrimination. 
 
12.      BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS 
 
           Types and basic features of business enterprises – Sole Proprietorship; Partnership,  
           Joint- Stock companies (Private and Public), Co-operatives; Statutory Corporation,  
           Joint ventures. Sources of funds.  General and basic problems of business  
           enterprises.  Privatization and Commercialization as solutions to problems of  
           public enterprises. Indigenization and nationalization policies. 
 

13. DISTRIBUTIVE TRADE 
 
 Process of distribution, role of producers, role of wholesalers, retailers and  
 co-operatives: the role of government agencies in product distribution and the  
 problems of distribution and their solutions. 
 
14.     POPULATION AND LABOUR MARKET 
 
  (a)  Population - determination and implication of size and growth of      
population, Rural – urban migration, Malthusian theory of population               
Geographical, age, sex and occupational distribution.  Importance and 
problems of census.  Population and economic development (under - 
population, optimum population and over- population). 
 
    (b)  Labour Market 
 
(i) Concept of labour force and human capital, efficiency and mobility of 
labour, factors affecting the size of the labour force, particularly the 
population characteristics (age, sex, occupation, education, etc.)  
 
           (ii)    supply of and demand for labour: wage determination. Concept of 
                                    unemployment and underemployment, Trade Unions, Employers’ 
                                     association and Government policies on labour and wages. 
 
         15.    AGRICULTURE 
 
              Structure (e.g. food crops, export crops, livestock, fisheries): systems of  
                  agriculture 
               (peasant, commercial, co-operative and state farming); importance of agriculture 
      to the national economy: marketing of agricultural products (commodity boards). 
                Agricultural policies (minimum agricultural prices) problems of agriculture and  
             remedies. 
 
      16.    INDUSTRIALIZATION 
 
     Meaning and types of industry. Definition of industrial concepts: plant, firm,  
     industry and industrial estates. Location of industry, localization, role of  
     industrialization in economic development.  Strategies of industrialization.  
     Problems of industrialization.The link between agricultural and industrial 
     development. 
 
 
    17.       NATIONAL INCOME 
 
      Meaning of major national income concepts e.g. Gross Domestic Product, Gross 
      National Product.  Net National Product, etc.  Different ways of measuring  
      national   income and their problems.  Uses and limitations of national income  
      data; trends and structure of national income. 
 
 

 
      18.      MONEY AND INFLATION 
 
(a) Money – definition and historical development-barter and its problems, types, 
         characteristics functions.  Supply of and demand for money, value of money 
         and the price level. 
  (b)    Inflation: meaning types, causes, effects and control.   
 
     19.     FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS    
 
   Types (traditional, Central Bank, Commercial Bank, Development Bank,  
   Merchant Bank, and Insurance Companies, Building Societies) : development  
   and functions of financial institutions.  Money and capital markets; meaning, 
   types and functions 
 
    20.      PUBLIC FINANCE 
 
   Fiscal policy and objectives of public finance:  Sources of government revenue.   
   Taxation -types(direct and indirect),objectives, merits, demerits and incidence;  
   Principles/canons of taxation; Rates of taxation(proportional, progressive and  
   regressive) direct and indirect taxation:  incidence and effects of taxes, composition/  
   structure of public  expenditure (recurrent and capital expenditure): effects of  
   public expenditure. Government budget and the national debt. 
 
    21.      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING 
 
   Meaning of economic development, distinction between economic growth and  
   development, characteristics and problems of developing countries, elements of 
   development planning (objectives of planning, and  problems of planning). Types 
   of plans (short term, medium term, perspective or long term, rolling plan etc.). 
 
    22.      INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
 
   (a)   International Trade: differences between domestic and international trade, the  
            basis of international trade, absolute and comparative cost advantage,  terms of 
            trade (definition and measurement) commercial policy (objectives) and  
            instruments –  tariffs (types) and direct control. Trend and structure of West  
            African countries’ external trade. 
 
(b) Balance of Payments: role of money in international  transactions, meaning 
and components of balance of payments, balance of payments disequilibrium, 
balance of payments adjustments (exchange rate policy exchange control, 
monetary and fiscal policies) and financing (the use of reserves and 
international borrowing). 
 
   
 23.       ECONOMIC INTEGRATION 
 
               Economic Integration (objectives, levels of  and features). Development and  
               problems of economic integration in West Africa- ECOWAS 

 
24.     INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS 
 
Development and role of: 
- Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)    
- Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) 
- International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
- International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 
- African Development Bank (AfDB) 
- United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) 
           etc. relevance of such organizations to West African Countries. 
 
 
25.    MAJOR NATURAL RESOURCES 
 
Development of major natural resources (petroleum, gold, diamond,  timber, 
groundnut etc) effects on West African economies (positive and negative).