

1 
 
 
FRENCH 
 
1.  PREAMBLE 
 
The  French  syllabus  is  drawn  from  the  Senior  High  School  curricular  of  member 
countries and seeks to impact students with the requisite knowledge, skills, attitudes and 
values to communicate effectively in French for personal development and understanding 
of and participation in the affairs of the Sub-region and the world at large. 
 
2. GENERAL AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
 
This  syllabus  is  intended  to  test  the  candidates’  ability  to  use  the  four  language  skills 
namely, listening, speaking, reading and writing to promote communicative competence. 
 
3. SCHEME OF EXAMINATION 
 
There will be three papers – Papers 1, 2 and 3, all of which should be taken. Papers 1 and 
2 will be a composite paper, to be taken at one sitting. 
 
PAPER 1: Will  consist  of  forty  multiple  choice  questions, to  be  answered  within  1 
hour for 40 marks. 
 
PAPER 2: Will  consist  of  two  sections  with  three  essay  questions  each.  Candidates 
will  be  required  to  answer  two  questions  in  all,  one  question  from  each 
section. Both questions will be answered within 1 hour 15 minutes for 40 
marks. 
 
PAPER 3: Will   test   candidates’   listening   comprehension,   and   reading   and 
conversation abilities.  Each candidate will require 40 minutes for the test.  
The paper will carry 50 marks. 
 
 
4. DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 More detailed requirements for the tests are as follows: 
 
PAPER 1  
 
(a) Section A: Comprehension 
 
This  is  designed  to  test  candidates’  ability  to  read  and  understand  standard  written 
documents in French.    
Two  passages,  each  of  about  150  words,  will  be  provided  and  a  total  of  five  short 
questions  will  be  set  on  each.  The  questions  in  this  section  will  be  multiple-  choice 
questions only.  Candidates will be required to answer al lquestions. 
 
(b) Section B: Structure  

2 
 
This  section  is  designed  to  test  candidates’  ability  to  use,  inappropriate  communicative 
contexts, French words, expressions and structural patterns.  Thirty short questions will be 
set and candidates will be required to attempt all of them. 
 
PAPER 2       
 
 This paper is made up of two sections:  (a) Essay and (b) Letter writing. It will test 
candidates’ ability to write freely and correctly on topics of general interest, using the 
appropriate structures, registers and tenses.   
     
Section A: Essay  
 
Section B: Letter writing         
 
Three questions will be set on each. Candidates are expected to answer one question only 
from each section.  The expected length of each composition will be about 100 words. 
 
PAPER 3  
(a) Listening Comprehension 
This paper will test candidates’ ability to listen to, and understand a straightforward 
passage in French.  The test which will be based on a passage to be read aloud by the 
examiner will be about 200 words long.    It will deal with issues of general interest. 
During the first 10 minutes, the passage will be read twice.  Candidates will study the 
questions for 3minutes before the second reading.  At the end of the second reading, 
candidates will be allowed7 minutes to answer, in writing, 10 questions based on the 
passage.  The questions may not be multiple-choice questions only but may also include 
other forms of language testing such as open-ended questions, transformation and 
substitution.   
(b) Reading  
The aim is to test candidates’ ability to read aloud, with the appropriate pronunciation 
and fluency.  For this purpose, a simple passage of about 100 words will be provided.  
The passage will be of contemporary interest.  In principle, candidates will be asked to 
read once and at a normal pace. 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
(c) Conversation   
 The conversation test will last about 10 minutes per candidate. Topics to be discussed 
will be drawn from themes of general and contemporary  interests such as sports, health, 
leisure, education, politics, culture, etc. There will be two sections, one on dialogue and 
the other on exposition, as follows: 
(i) Dialogue – This will test candidates’ ability to express themselves freely in a 
dialogue.  For this purpose, candidates will be expected to respond to a minimum 
of ten questions.  For Ghana, five of these questions will be on selected literature 
texts.  
(ii) Exposition – This will test candidates’ ability to speak freely on a given topic in 
French .The candidate is expected to make a minimum of 5 sentences. 
 
 6.  NOTES ON THE SYLLABUS 
 (1)    Structure  
This will be tested, as far as possible, within suitable communicative 
contexts.  To this end, candidates are expected to be familiar with the 
following: 
• Parts of speech (Grammatical categories) 
• Articles – definite, indefinite, partitive. (Gender and number where 
applicable). 
• Verbs 
(a) Types:   regular and irregular 
(b) Common moods and tenses 
(c) Standard expressions such as 
 - avoir + noun (e.g. avoir faim) 
 - venir de + infinitive. 
• Nouns –    complements, gender, number 
• Pronouns – personal, possessive, indefinite, demonstrative, 
relative, impersonal, (number and gender where applicable). 
• Adjectives     -      possessive, demonstrative, indefinite 
interrogative, (agreement and position) 
 
 
 

4 
 
• Adverbs   -     formation and position, special adverbs:  mal, vite, 
fort, tout, etc. 
• Negatives  -  negative expressions (ne...pas, ne...rien, ne... 
jamais, etc.) 
• Conjunctions in common use: et, mais, donc, , ou, parce que, etc 
• Preposition   - à, de, sur, en, devant, etc. 
• Sentence patterns (declarative, interrogative, exclamative, etc) 
• Voice – active/passive 
• Direct speech/reported speech 
• Compound and complex sentences 
• Idiomatic expressions& proverbs 
• Forms of writing (formal/informal) 
• Context and meaning e.g. to convey politeness, disgust, 
disappointment. 
• Common figures of speech e.g. (similes, metaphors, hyperbols) 
• Structures of major “Acte de Parole” e.g. (exprimer ladeception, la 
probation, le degout, la surprise, le plaisir, le regret, etc. 
 
7.   SUGGESTED READING LIST 
 The following may be of assistance to the candidates: 
 1. Course books 
  (i) De Grandsaigne, J:   -   France-Afrique 4, Lagos, Macmillan 
  (ii) Plaisant, Chantal, et al:  -Trans Afrique 3, Lagos, Macmillan 
  (iii)     Ajiboye, Tunde et al:   -   Nouvel Horizon 4, Ibadan, Bounty  
      Press Ltd. 
  (iv)     Mazauric, Catherine et al:   -  On y va 3, Ibadan, Spectrum  
                                                                                    Books 
  (v) Berard, Evelyne et al:   -   Tempo 1 & 2, Didier, Hatier 
  (vi)     Task Force (MEST):   -  -  Et en français 1 - 3, Freetown 
  (vii)    Girardet J. &Pécheir J: - écho junior A2 méthode de français, Paris : CLÉ 
                                                                           Internationale 
  
 
 

5 
 
 
 
            2. General Grammar Books 
  (i) Ajiboye, T.:   -   Companion to French Grammar, 
     Ilorin, Info-Links Publishers 
  (ii) Ferrar H. A:   -   French Reference Grammar, 
     OxfordUniversity Press   
  (iii)     Dangnaud-Macé, P &Sylès, G.   
     LeFrançais sans faute, Paris, Hatier    
 
                      (iv) Le Nouveau Bescherelle:   -   La grammaire pour tous, 
       Paris: Hatier 
  (v) Soyoye, F. A:   -   Manuel de conjugaison de verbes, 
     Sophire Ed. Resources 
 
3. Any other useful grammar books 
  
             4.     ORAL Practice 
 (i) Ajiboye, T:  -  An Introduction to Practice in Oral French, Revised 
    edition, Ibadan, Bounty Press Ltd. 
 (ii) Grandsaigne,J:  -  France Afrique 5, Lagos, Macmillan 
 (iii)     Adegbilero, L. M   -   Teaching Yourself French (with cassette/CD) 
    Revised edition, Ibadan, Bounty Press Ltd. 
 (iv)     Chamberlain, Alan & Steele Ross Guide pratique de la 
      communication, Paris, Didier 
 
                        Any other useful document designed for Oral Practice 
5. Literature (Ghana only)  
 
   (a)       J. N. D. Dodoo: La  Belle Fleure et d’autres Histoires, Accra 
 
   (b)      TundeAjiboye: Olurounbi ou Le Prix d’un Pari 
 
   (c)       Hector, Malot: Sans Famille, Paris  
 
  
 

6 
 
 
          6.   Dictionaries/Glossaries 
 (i)    Any useful French dictionary e.g. 
  - Micro Robert/Petit Robert 
  - Petit Larousse 
  - Dictionnaire du français fondamental pour l’Afrique 
 (ii)   Any useful French – English/English-French dictionary e.g. 
- Shorter Harraps 
- Collins 
- Cassell’s 
  
            (iii)     Any useful French glossary e.g. 
  Français Fondamental for West Africa, WAEC, Accra, Black Mask 
  Ltd,  
 
To enhance comprehension skills, extracts from simple modern literary and other texts 
(magazines, newspapers, brochures, etc.) dealing with contemporary issues may be of immense 
assistance.     
 
  
 
 
  