0 
 
 
OFFICE OF THE HEAD OF THE CIVIL 
SERVICE 
FINAL DRAFT ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTIONS 
FOR THE GHANA CIVIL SERVICE 
 
November 2020 
      
      

 
1 
 
 
Table of Contents 
PREAMBLE ................................................................................................................................................... 2 
CHAPTER I: STRUCTURE OF THE CIVIL SERVICE .................................................................................. 4 
CHAPTER 2: STAFF RCRUITMENT, DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRESSION ..................................... 12 
CHAPTER 3: MOVEMENTS WITHIN THE CIVIL SERVICE .................................................................... 63 
CHAPTER 4: ETHICS, VALUES AND CODE OF CONDUCT.............................................................. 70 
CHAPTER 5: LABOUR RELATIONS AND DISCIPLINE ......................................................................... 83 
CHAPTER 6: OFFICE ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................................ 108 
CHAPTER 7: GENERAL SERVICES ....................................................................................................... 132 
CHAPTER 8: REMUNERATION ............................................................................................................. 142 
CHAPTER 9: STAFF WELFARE............................................................................................................... 147 
CHAPTER 10: MONTHLY-RATED EMPLOYEE .................................................................................... 181 
CHAPTER 11: EXIT FROM THE CIVIL SERVICE .................................................................................. 183 
CHAPTER I2: MISCELLANEOUS ........................................................................................................... 192 
APPENDICES .......................................................................................................................................... 198 
APPENDIX I: A MODEL ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE FOR A MINISTRY ............................ 198 
APPENDIX II: SCHEDULES ................................................................................................................. 199 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
PREAMBLE  
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE GHANA CIVIL SERVICE, 2020 
Pursuant  to  provisions  made  in  Section  92  (3)  and  (4)  of  the  Civil  Service Law, 
1993 (PNDCL 327), and Regulation 4 (1) of the Civil Service Regulations, 2020, the 
Head of the Civil Service, after consultation with the Civil Service Council hereby 
issues these Administrative Instructions. 
 
PART I – INTRODUCTION 
1. Purpose 
These   Administrative   Instructions   provide   guidelines,   standards   and 
explanatory  notes  to  assist  Chief  Directors,  Heads  of  Departments  and 
staff of the Civil Service to interpret and apply the Civil Service Regulations 
consistently.  
 
2. Objective 
The  Administrative  Instructions,  in  accordance  with  Section  91 (3)  of  the 
Civil  Service  Law,  1993 (PNDCL  327), shall  constitute  the  basic  principles, 
rules  of  procedure, guidelines,  standards and  explanatory  notes for  general 
application in the Civil Service. 
 
3. Scope 
(1) The Instructions apply to all staff of the Civil Service, namely: 
 
(a)  a person serving in a civil capacity in a post designated as a 
Civil Service post by or under any legislation in: 
(i)     the Office of the President; 
(ii)     a Ministry;  
(iii)     a Government department at the national level; and, 

 
3 
 
(iv)   a  non-decentralised  department  of  a  central  national 
department at the regional and district level. 
(b)  a  person  holding  a  post  designated  as  Civil  Service  post 
created  by  or  under  the  authority  of  any  other  enactment, 
the emoluments attached to which are paid directly from the 
Consolidated     Fund     or     other source     approved     by 
Government. 
 
(2) Specifically, the following Institutions are affected: 
 
(a) Ministries 
(b) Extra Ministerial Organisations 
(c) Non-Decentralized Departments 
(d) Head Offices of Decentralised Departments  
(e) Ghana Missions Abroad  
(f)  Special Departments or Secretariats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4 
 
CHAPTER I: STRUCTURE OF THE CIVIL SERVICE 
PART I 
ORGANISATION 
 
4. Definition of Civil Service 
(1)   The Civil Service is  that part of the Public Service that is concerned 
with   service   in   a   civil   capacity   in both   central   and   local 
government, as provided in the Civil Service Law,1993, (Act 327). 
 
(2)  The Civil Service is a unified service. 
 
5. Structure of the Civil Service 
(1) The Civil Service is composed of: 
 
(a) the Office of the President and its Secretariats; 
(b) Ministries and Departments; 
(c) Non-Decentralized Departments; 
(d) Ghana Missions Abroad; 
(e) Special Departments or Secretariats; 
(f) Non-decentralized  Departments  of  Offices  of  the  Regional 
Coordinating Councils and District Assemblies; and 
(g) any    other    organisation    established as    a    Civil    Service 
Department in pursuance of any legislation. 
 
(2)  Appendix 1 is a model organizational structure for a Ministry  
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
6. Functions   of   Ministries,   Departments,   Regional Coordinating Councils 
(RCCs) and District Assemblies  
(1) Ministries   formulate   policy   and   are   responsible   for   planning, 
coordination, monitoring   and   evaluation   of   performance   and 
efficiency  in  the  areas  of  their  authority.  In  the  case  of  non-
decentralised     Departments,     they     are     responsible     through 
delegation,   for   the   implementation of   policies   of   Government 
relating to their sectors. 
 
(2)  A  Regional Coordinating  Council  is  responsible  for  coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation of Government policies and functions of 
District Assemblies in its region. 
 
(3) A  District  Assembly  is  responsible for  the  implementation  of  policies 
and  plans  of  Government  and  the  District  Assembly  and  for  the 
effective management of the District. 
7. Government Machinery 
It is  important for a staff of the Civil Service to be conversant with and to 
respect    the    established    Government    Machinery.    The    established 
Government machinery is as follows:  
 
 
(1) the   Office   of   the   President   is   responsible   for   ensuring   that 
Government  business  is effectively and efficiently executed  and 
coordinated; 
 
(2) a Minister of state is responsible for a Ministry or a specific portfolio; 
 
(3) the  Government  is  represented in the Region  by  the  Regional 
Minister; 

 
6 
 
(4) the Regional Minister is responsible for the effective administration of 
the Region; 
 
(5) the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  has  overall  charge  of  all staff of  the 
Civil  Service and  ensures  that  the  policies  and  programmes  of 
Government are effectively executed; 
 
(6)  a Chief  Director  or  Regional  Coordinating  Director  shall  assist  the    
Minister in securing the general efficiency of a Ministry or Region; 
 
(7)  a District   Coordinating   Director   shall   assist   the   District   Chief 
Executive  in  the  effective delivery  of  Government  policies  and 
programmes in the District; and, 
 
(8) a Head  of  Department  shall  be  responsible  for  the  efficient  and 
effective   operation   of   the   Department   and   provide   technical 
support to the Ministry. 
 
 
PART II 
CLASSIFICATION OF CIVIL SERVICE POSTS 
 
8. Classification of Posts 
(1) Civil  Service  posts  are  grouped  into  General  and  Departmental 
posts. 
 
(2) The Classification   of   posts   is   broadly   based   on   functions   or 
occupations. 
 

 
7 
 
9. Categories of Posts 
(1) Posts   in   the   Civil   Service   shall   be   categorized as General   or 
Departmental posts. 
 
(2) There shall be the following categories of posts in the Civil Service:  
(a)   Category ‘A’ – as shown in Appendix II 
(b)  Category ‘B’ – as shown in Appendix III 
(c)  Category ‘C’ – as shown in Appendix IV  
(d)  Category ‘D’– as shown in Appendix V 
(e)  Category ‘E’ – as shown in Appendix V 
10. Grade 
A post with the same title and salary scale constitute a grade. 
 
11. General Classes 
(1) The General Class includes  the managerial and administrative staff 
of Ministries and Departments. 
 
(2) The General Class posts are further grouped into Classes, each with 
a Head of Class. A Class is a group of distinct professional groups of 
different grades. Among these are:  
 
Class                                                                    Head 
(a) Administrative and Management       Chief Director, OHCS 
(b) Executive/Clerical                                  Chief Director, OHCS 
(c) Works and Engineering                                 Engineer in Chief, Public  
Works Department 
(d) Secretarial                                      Chief Director, OHCS 
(e) Accounting                                           Controller and      

 
8 
 
Accountant-General 
(f) Information Technology/                       Chief Director, OHCS 
Management   
                    (h)Procurement and Supply Chain                  Director, Procurement  
           and Supply Chain    
                                                                                                  Management, OHCS 
 
(i)Budget                                                            Director of Budget,  
           Ministry of Finance 
(j) Records Management                                Director, PRAAD 
(j) Economic Officers                 Chief Director, MoF 
(k) Planning                         Chief Director, OHCS 
(l) Internal Audit      Director, Internal Audit  
(m) Research      Chief Director 
(n) Registrar   Registrar, Births and      
                            Deaths  
(o) Security      Chief Director 
(p) Estate      Chief Director 
(q) Tradesmen     Chief Director 
(r)  Transport      Chief Director 
(s) Catering      Chief Director 
(t) Protocol      Chief Director 
 
12. Departmental Posts 
(1) These   are   posts   which   are   derived   from   the   type of   work, 
occupation or profession. They are peculiar to the departments for 
which they are created in that the personnel in these posts cannot 
as  a  rule  be  posted  from  their  parent  department  to  another 
department with a different Head. 

 
9 
 
 
(2) These include: 
 
Departmental Class    Head 
Cooperative Officer   - Registrar of Cooperatives 
Labour Officer    - Chief Labour Officer 
Factory Inspector    - Chief Inspector of Factories 
Industrial Relations Officers  - Chief Industrial Relations  
   Officer 
13. Creation of Posts 
(1)  An  application  for  creation  of  posts in  the  Civil  Service  shall  be 
submitted by the Head of Department to the Office of the Head of 
the Civil Service, and shall provide the following data: 
 
(a)  The title of the posts 
(b)  The reason for creating the post 
(c)  The total complement of staff required 
(d)  A statement of the duties and qualifications  
(e)  Salary Scale 
 
(2)  An  application  shall  be  consistent  with  the  existing  Scheme  of 
Service of the Ministry or Department. 
  
14. Scheme of Service 
(1) A General  or  Departmental Class of  the  Service  shall  have  a 
Scheme  of Service that provides  the framework or plan prescribing 
the  human  resource  management  and  development  system  for  a 
specific Class of   employees.   It   is   designed   for   the   systematic 
development  of  the  employees in  their  respective  occupational 
categories.  It  provides  for  the  typical  career  progression  structure 
within the Class. 

 
10 
 
 
(2) A Scheme of Service shall define: 
(a)  the objective and overall responsibility for the Class; 
  (b) the grade levels and corresponding salary ranges; 
(c) a  summary  of  the responsibilities  and  the  duties  attached to 
the job for each level in the Class; 
(d) the    conditions    for    entry    (in-service/direct)    into    and 
progression through each grade within the Class including: 
   (i) academic and professional qualifications; 
   (ii) minimum periods of service in the current grade; 
(iii) detailed   job   training   and   experience/competency 
requirements; 
   (iv) procedure for promotion and Class transfers; and, 
(v) requirements  for  minimum  periods  of service  in  the 
Regions,   Directorates,   Ministries   or   Districts,   where 
applicable. 
 
15. Training Scheme 
There  shall  be  a  Training  Scheme,  attached  as  an  appendix  to  the 
Scheme of Service, that defines: 
 
(a) Purpose or Objective; 
 (b) Eligibility; 
(c) Scope of Training; 
 (d) Place and Duration of Training; 
 (e) Terms of Awards; 
 (f) Qualification on Completion of Training; 
 (g) Eligible Appointment; 
 (h) Bonding; and, 
 (i) Selection Mechanism. 

 
11 
 
16. Revision of Scheme of Service 
(1) Heads  of Class,  in  consultation  with  OHCS,  shall  revise  and  update 
their Schemes of Service every five (5) years  to meet the changing 
qualification  requirements,  as  well  as,  the  developmental  needs  of 
the Class. 
 
(2) Heads of Class shall submit revised Schemes of Service to the Head 
of  the  Civil  Service who  shall  forward same to  the  Civil  Service 
Council with recommendations. 
 
(3) The Civil Service Council shall approve a Scheme of Service for the 
Department or Class. 
 
 
 

 
12 
 
CHAPTER 2: STAFF RCRUITMENT, DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRESSION 
PART 1 
RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF STAFF 
 
17. Recruitment 
(1) The recruitment of staff into the Civil Service shall be in accordance 
with the Scheme of Service and subject to the existence of: 
(a) a human resource plan for the Ministry or Department; 
(b) an approved vacancy; and, 
(c) a financial clearance. 
 
(2) Recruitment  of  staff  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  Ministry  or 
Department and not on any other consideration. 
 
(3)  Whenever  it  is  desired  to  fill  any  post  in  the  Civil  Service,  the  first 
consideration shall be given to qualified serving officers. 
 
18. Appointment of Ghanaians Resident Outside Ghana into Categories ‘A’ 
and ‘B’ in the Civil Service 
(1) The Civil Service Council shall in consultation with the Public Services 
Commission  initiate  the recruitment of Ghanaians  resident  outside 
and submit the selection report to the President for his authorization 
of the appointment into Category ‘A’ posts; 
 
(2) The  Civil  Service  Council  shall be  responsible  for  the  recruitment  of 
Ghanaians resident outside officers into Category ‘B’ posts. 
 
 

 
13 
 
19. Appointment of a non-Ghanaian into Categories ‘A’ and ‘B’ in the Civil 
Service 
(1)  Chief Director, in whose Ministry the recruitment is made shall make 
recommendations  to the Civil Service Council and the Civil Service 
Council  shall  in  consultation  with  the Public  Services  Commission 
initiate  the  recruitment non-Ghanaians,  and  submit the  selection 
report  to  the  President  for  authorization  of  the  appointment  into 
Category ‘A’ posts. 
 
(2) The  Civil  Service  Council  shall  arrange  to  recruit an officer into a 
Category ‘B’ post unless the Head of the Civil Service is aware of a 
Ghanaian candidate who may prove suitable to fill a vacancy. 
 
20. Appointment into Category ‘C’ Posts 
(1) Where  a  vacancy  in  a  Category  ‘C’  post  is  to  be  filled  by 
recruitment of a Ghanaian not resident in Ghana,  the Head  of the 
Civil  Service  shall  initiate  the  recruitment process,  and  submit  the 
selection report to the Civil Service Council.  
 
(2) Where  a  vacancy  in  a  Category  ‘C’  post  is  to  be  filled  by 
recruitment  outside  Ghana  of  a  non-Ghanaian,  and  unless the 
Head  of  Civil  Service  is  aware  of  any  Ghanaian  who  may  prove 
suitable to fill the vacancy, the Head of the Civil Service shall initiate 
the  procedure  for  recruitment,  and  submit  the  selection  report  to 
the Civil Service Council. 
 
(3) Where  a  vacancy in a Category  ‘C’  post  is  to  be  filled  by  the 
recruitment  in  Ghana  or  by  the recruitment  of  a  Ghanaian  not 
resident  in  Ghana,  the  Head  of  Department  or  the  Head  of  the 

 
14 
 
Class,     as     the     case     may     be,     shall     submit appropriate 
recommendations to    the    Head    of    the    Civil Service. The 
recommendations shall indicate the vacancy to be filled and must 
be accompanied by a draft advertisement. 
 
(4) Where  the  vacancy  in  the Category ‘C’ post is to be filled by the 
recruitment   outside   Ghana   of   a   non-Ghanaian,   the   Head   of 
Department or the Head   of   the Class (having   first   obtained 
approval  for  a  recruitment of  a  non-Ghanaian),  shall  submit  his 
recommendation  to  the Head  of  the Civil  Service,  and  unless  the 
Head  of  the  Civil  Service is  aware  of  any  Ghanaian  who  might 
prove   suitable   to fill   the vacancy,   the   Council   shall   recruit 
accordingly. 
 
(5) If,  as  a  result of  recruitment  in  Ghana,  it  is  found  necessary  to 
recommend  the  appointment  to  a  Category  ‘C’  post  of  a  non-
Ghanaian,  then  the  Civil  Service  Council  shall  not  authorize  the 
appointment of that person, unless the Minister concerned, or in the 
case  of  a  special  Department  or  one  of  the Classes,  the  President, 
has given his approval. 
 
21. Conditions for Recruitment 
The following conditions shall be satisfied prior to recruitment: 
 
(1)  Chief Directors and  Heads  of  Department  shall  initiate  the  process 
of recruitment; 
(2)  vacancies must be available; 
(3)  reasons  must be shown why fresh or new recruitment is  a preferred 
option  to  filling  the  vacancy  rather  than  by  promotion  from  within 
the Department; 

 
15 
 
(4)  vacancies must be advertised; 
(5)  advertisements   must   state   clearly   the   entry   requirements   as 
provided  for  the  Scheme  of  Service  of  the  Ministry  or  Department; 
and, 
(6)  Technical  and Financial  Clearance  must  be  obtained  from  the 
OHCS and Ministry of Finance, respectively, if required. 
 
22. Advertisement of Vacancies 
Advertisement  of  vacancies  shall  be  made  internally,  externally,  or  both, 
to    invite    interested    and    suitably    qualified    persons    to    apply    for 
consideration. 
 
(1) The advertisement shall include a brief and accurate description of 
the  duties  and  responsibilities  to  be  undertaken,  as  well  as  the 
essential criteria which will be applied in the selection process. 
 
(2) Qualifications may be delineated between those that are essential 
and those that are desirable for the position(s). 
 
(3) In  advertising  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  Civil  Service,  Ministries  and 
Departments    shall    encourage    or    consciously    call    for    the 
participation of women and people with disability. 
 
23. Headhunting 
Skills  search  or “head-hunting”  may  be used  to  identify  candidates  for 
senior posts or where skills are scarce.  
 
(1) Where  this  process  is chosen,  it  shall  be  demonstrated  that  the 
qualifications  and  special  requirements  of  the  position  in  question 
cannot   be   obtained   through   the   normal process   of   initially 

 
16 
 
considering  eligible  serving  officers  within  the  organisation  and 
open advertisement.  
 
(2) Once   candidates   have   been   identified   through   headhunting, 
however,  the  principles  of  selection  on  merit  shall  be  applied,  as 
required in the case of other methods of recruitment. 
 
24. Selection Interviews  
(1) Where  a  vacancy  in  a  Civil  Service  post  has  been advertised,  the 
appointing  authority  shall  use  the  advertised  requirements  for  the 
posts to short-list applicants for selection into the position.  
 
(2) The  short-listed  candidates  shall  be  invited  in  writing  to  appear 
before  an  Interview  Selection  Board  constituted  by  the  appointing 
authority. 
 
(3) All   candidates   shall   be   given   equal   opportunities   during   the 
interview 
  
(4) The   Selection   Board   shall   submit   its report   to   the   Appointing 
Authority,    with    the    candidates    recommended    in    order    of 
preference. 
 
25. Other Conditions for Employment 
In  addition  to  the  stated  qualifications,  experiences  and  competencies 
required  for  the  job, the  requirements  in  respect of  the following must  be 
satisfied for employment into the Civil Service: 
 
 

 
17 
 
(1) Citizenship 
Positions   in   the   Civil   Service   shall   be   reserved   for   Ghanaians, 
including  those  who  have  legally  acquired  citizenship  but  non-
Ghanaian citizens may be employed on fixed-term contracts for up 
to a maximum of three (3) years on the following conditions: 
 
(a) the possession of special skills not available in Ghana; 
(b) must have acquired valid work and residential permits; and, 
(c) the  position  must  be  in  non-sensitive  areas  of  the  Public 
Service. 
 
(2) Age  
Eligibility for employment into the Civil Service on ‘permanent’ basis 
other  than  renewable contract  terms,  is  open  to  persons  aged 
eighteen (18)  years  and  above,  subject  to  the  exigencies  of  the 
service and the 1992 Constitution. 
 
(3) Medical Fitness 
Pre-employment  health  certification,  except  HIV/AIDS  checks,  will 
be required for appointment into the Civil Service. 
 
a) A candidate seeking employment in the Civil Service must be 
certified   as   medically   fit   by   a Medical Officer   of   an 
accredited health facility.  
b) It  shall  be  an  offence  if  the prospective staff  of  the  Civil 
Service is  deemed  to  have  obtained  a  false medical  report 
for purposes of employment. 
 

 
18 
 
c) Where particular health or physical requirements are essential 
for the performance of the job, these shall be clearly stated in 
the advertisement.  
 
d) A staff of the Civil Service whose services are terminated due 
to ill-health will have to undergo a medical examination as a 
pre-condition   for   re-appointment   into   the   Civil   Service, 
subject to availability of vacancy. 
 
(4) Core Values of the Civil Service 
Applicants  for  employment  into  the  Civil  Service shall  be  of  good 
character,  be  law  abiding  and  prepared  to  abide  by  the  Code  of 
Conduct  for staff  of  the Civil  Service.  This  is  essential  to  protect the 
public  interest  and  the  image  of  the  Civil  Service.  Prospective staff 
of   the Civil   Service may,   therefore,   be   required   to   provide 
information about past convictions, which could have a bearing on 
their suitability for employment in the Civil Service. 
 
(5)      Background Investigations and Checks 
a) Prospective staff  of  the Civil  Service shall be  subjected  to 
background investigation and checks as a means of ensuring 
due diligence in hiring. These checks are intended to provide 
factual information about candidates, discourage applicants 
who may have something to hide and encourage applicants 
to  be  honest when  completing  the application  forms  and 
during interviews. 
b) Nominal  vetting  may  be  conducted  on  all staff  of  the Civil 
Service by designated security agencies. Positive vetting shall, 
however, be   conducted   on   candidates   whose   positions 

 
19 
 
require   that   they   handle   sensitive   information   and   take 
sensitive  decisions  in  the  interest  of  the  State.  Where  security 
clearance is a requirement of the position, this shall be clearly 
stated in the letter of appointment. 
 
(6)   References 
A  candidate  shall  be  required  to  provide  the  names  and  contact 
addresses of persons who will be prepared to give frank, honest and 
objective  attestation  of  the  candidate’s  qualifications,  work, 
conduct,  among  others. The  information must be  treated  with 
utmost  confidentiality  by  the  appointing  authority.  The  referees 
provided  by  the  candidate may include  persons  from  academic 
institutions  attended,  previous  place  of  employment  and  persons 
who  have deep  knowledge of  the candidate’s background. The 
employer  reserves  the  right  to  verify  any  academic  or  professional 
certificate submitted in support of the application for employment. 
 
26. Letters of Appointment 
(1) Letters  of  appointment  shall  be  issued  by the  Appointing  Authority 
or by the officer to whom authority has been delegated in writing. 
 
(2) A letter of appointment shall indicate the following: 
 
(a) a reference number; 
(b) date of issue of the letter; 
(c) appointing authority; 
(d) position to be appointed to; 
(e) tenure of appointment;(where applicable) 
(f) effective date of appointment; 
(g) probation period; 

 
20 
 
(h) duties and responsibilities (attach detailed job description); 
(i) salary scale attached to the post and salary point of entry; 
(j) annual leave entitlement; 
(k) benefits and entitlements; 
(l) other conditions associated with the position 
(m) notification for exit; 
(n) social security contribution, where applicable; 
(o) assets declaration (where applicable); 
(p) reference  to  the  relevant  rules  and  regulations  of  the  Civil 
Service; 
(q) medical report requirement; 
(r) checks (security, previous place of work and referees); 
(s) the period for acceptance of the offer of appointment; and 
(t) offices to which the appointment letter is to be copied. 
 
27. Effective Date of Appointment of a staff of the Civil Service on Recruitment 
(1) The effective date of appointment of a staff of the Civil Service on 
recruitment shall be: 
 
(a) the  date  of  assumption  of  duty,  for  a  Ghanaian  or  non-
Ghanaian recruited in Ghana; and, 
(b) the  date  of  embarkation  to  assume  duty,  for  an  officer 
recruited  outside  Ghana, provided the  officer  travels, as 
directed. 
 
(2) Chief Directors and Heads of Department shall notify the appointing 
authority of the date of assumption of duty of the officer. 
 
 
 

 
21 
 
28. Employee Personal Record Form 
For each new appointment, staff of the Civil Service shall, within a period 
of one (1) month, be required to complete an employee data form (with 
a passport picture affixed) detailing the following: 
 
(a) full name; 
(b) Tax Identification Number (TIN) 
(c) SSNIT number; 
(d) national identification number; 
(e) date of birth (copy of birth certificate); 
(f) sex; 
(g) hometown; 
(h) home address; 
(i) e-mail address; 
(j) telephone number (fixed line and, or mobile); 
(k) address (postal, residential); 
(l) previous employer (if any); 
(m) educational background; 
(n)      marital status; 
(o) name of spouse; 
(p) children if any (names and dates of birth);  
(q) next-of-kin (name, address and telephone number); and, 
(r) any other relevant information. 
 
29. Date of Birth 
When the date of birth declared by an officer on first appointment to the 
Civil   Service   has   been   accepted   and   entered   in record, it   cannot 
subsequently be amended. 
(1)  When  the  officer  knows  the  year  of  birth  but  not  the  month, the 
officer will be deemed to have been born on 1
st
 July. 

 
22 
 
(2) When  the  officer  knows  the year  and month  but  not  the  day,  the 
officer  will  be  deemed to have been  born  on  the  16
th
 of  that 
month. 
 
30. Concealment or False Declaration 
Concealment  of  any  facts  or the  intentional  provision  of  false  statement 
by an applicant may be considered sufficient grounds:  
 
(a) to deny the applicant the offer of employment, or; 
(b)  for  subsequent  dismissal  from  employment,  where  the  applicant  is 
already employed. 
 
31. Induction and Job Orientation  
Induction and job orientation shall be provided to introduce new workers 
to  the  Civil  Service,  its  office  facilities,  functions, structure, policies,  rules, 
procedures,  work ethics, job descriptions and filing of tax returns. It is  also 
meant to enable the officer to have a sense of belongingness to the Civil 
Service and to settle down as quickly as possible. 
 
32. Swearing of Oaths 
Newly appointed staff  of  the Civil  Service shall  be  required  to  take  the 
Oaths  of Office, Allegiance  and  Secrecy,  administered  by  the Chief 
Director or Head of the Department. 
 
33. Probation 
The  probation  period  in  the  Civil  Service  shall  be  six  (6)  months  for junior 
officers and nine (9) months for senior officers. 
  

 
23 
 
(1) However,   in   both   cases,   the   Chief   Director   or   the   Head   of 
Department  may  extend  the  probation  for  a  period  of  three  (3) 
months for stated reasons upon performance appraisal. 
 
(2) During  the  probation  period,  the staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall  be 
given: 
 
(a) job  description,  appropriate  training,  instructions,  orientation, 
guidance,  appropriate  resources  and  counselling, among 
others, where  necessary,  to  enable  the officer execute  the 
duties assigned and the officer shall be subject to evaluation; 
and, 
(b) clear and written indication on what and how the officer will 
be assessed during the probation period. 
 
34. Confirmation of appointment 
(1) A  written  confirmation  of  appointment  shall  be  given  to  an  officer 
on  satisfactory  completion  of  the  period  of  probation,  with  the 
incremental date clearly stated. 
 
(3) Confirmation  shall  be  preceded  by  an  appraisal  of  the  work  and 
conduct of the officer three (3) months to the end of the probation 
period.  The  appraisal must  be  based on predetermined  targets  set 
and agreed between the officer and the supervisor. 
 
(4) It  shall  be  deemed  that  the officer has  been  confirmed  in  the 
officer’s  post  unless  the  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department 
informs the officer in writing to the contrary, one (1) month after the 
expiry of the officer’s probation period. 

 
24 
 
(5) A  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  who  fails  to assess  an 
officer on  probation  for  confirmation,  without  reasonable  cause, 
within the stipulated time period is liable for appropriate sanction.  
 
35. Probation Period for Pregnant Staff  
A  female Civil  Service  staff who  is  pregnant  and  is  unable  to  serve  the 
probationary  period  shall  have  the  confirmation  of  her  appointment 
deferred  until  she  has  returned  from  maternity  leave  and  has completed 
her probationary period. 
 
36. Appointment on Temporary Terms  
(1) A Chief Director or a Head of Department may, depending on the 
exigencies of the service, appoint a temporary worker on month-to-
month basis provided the total duration of such appointment does 
not exceed a maximum period of six (6) months. 
  
(2) A person on temporary appointment in the Civil Service shall: 
 
(a) go    through    an    assessment    process    to    ascertain his 
qualification; 
(b) be given wages that are commensurate with his qualification 
and skills; 
(c) abide  by  the  rules and  regulations  of  work  as a permanent 
employee; 
(d) receive   a   basic   monthly   salary,   but   shall   not   enjoy   any 
appropriate  benefits  and  allowances  payable  to  permanent 
employees; and  
(e) contribute to social security and be liable to tax deductions. 
 
 

 
25 
 
37. Appointments on Casual Terms 
(1) A Chief Director or a Head of Department may, depending on the 
exigencies of the service, appoint a casual worker.  
 
(2) A person on appointed into the Civil Service on casual terms shall: 
(a) be given wages that are commensurate with his qualification 
and skills; 
(b) have   access   to   any   medical   facility   available   to   other 
employees; 
(c) be entitled to be paid for overtime work; 
(d) abide by the rules and regulations of work; and, 
(e) be  paid  minimum  remuneration  for  each  day  on which the 
casual worker attends work. 
 
38. Acting Appointments 
(1) An   acting   appointment   is   an   administrative   arrangement   that 
allows  for  the continuous  performance  of  duties  attached  to  a 
position   when   unpredictable   and   unavoidable   circumstances 
render  the  incumbent  temporarily  or  permanently unavailable  to 
function in the position. 
 
(2) Acting appointments are categorized into: 
(a) Acting Assignment; and,  
(b) Formal Acting Appointment. 
 
39. Acting Assignment 
(1) An  Acting  Assignment  is  usually  arranged  internally  as  a  stop-gap 
measure. For Chief Directors, Directors and analogous grades in the 
Civil Service, the appointing authority is the Head of the Civil Service 

 
26 
 
acting  on  behalf  of  the  Civil  Service Council.    For  grades  below 
Director  and  analogous  grades,  the  appointing  authority  shall  be 
the Chief Director or the Head of Department. 
 
(3) Situations which may occasion this action include the following: 
 
(a) interdiction of the incumbent; 
(b) dismissal; 
(c) termination or removal of the incumbent; 
(d) death; 
(e) leave; 
(f) indisposition; 
(g) short residential course at home or abroad; and, 
(h) short-term attachment to an external organisation. 
 
(3) Usually,  it  is  the  most  senior  and  available subordinate officer, one 
step  below  the  position  or  grade, who  is  assigned  in  an  acting 
capacity, unless the performance and conduct of that officer are in 
serious doubt.  
 
(4) In  the  absence  of  such  a  senior  officer,  an  officer  two  (2)  steps 
below the grade may be requested to act in that grade.  
 
(5) Under no circumstances should an officer be appointed to act in a 
post that is more than two (2) grades above his substantive grade. 
 
(6) In  all  instances,  acting  assignments  are  not  expected  to  confer 
advantage for purposes of promotion. 
 

 
27 
 
(7) Acting  assignments  are  temporary  arrangements  not  expected  to 
last more than six (6) months, and are not subject to confirmation.  
 
(8) Where the substantive is not likely or expected to resume duty, as in 
the  case  of  dismissal,  removal  or sudden  death,  action  shall  be 
taken  for  substantive  appointment  within  three  (3)  months,  and  in 
any case not later than six (6) months.  
 
(9) Where the substantive officer may resume work, as in the case of an 
interdiction,    leave,    indisposition,    training    course, temporary 
assignment, the acting assignment period of six (6) months may be 
extended, but not beyond one (1) year. 
 
(10) An  acting  assignment  shall  attract  compensation  in  the  form  of  an 
acting  or  charge  allowance, in  accordance  with  the  prevailing 
Government policy. 
 
40. Formal Acting Appointment 
(1) A formal acting appointment may be resorted to: 
 
(a) when a successor has not been groomed to take over due to 
lack of an effective succession plan; and, 
(b) where  the  sensitivity  of  the  post  demands  that  the  credibility 
and integrity of the person being considered for appointment 
is  observed  further,  or  more  time  is  needed  to  affirm the 
suitability  of  the  person  for  substantive appointment,  beyond 
all reasonable doubt. 
 

 
28 
 
(2) All  formal  acting  appointments  in  the  Civil  Service shall be  formally 
authorised  by  the  appropriate  appointing  authority  in  accordance 
with Article 195 of the Constitution.  
 
(4) For  Category ‘A’ posts, formal acting  appointments may  be made 
by the President on the advice of the Civil Service Council.  
 
(5) For  other  categories  of  posts, formal acting  appointments  shall  be 
made by the Civil Service Council. 
 
(6) Usually  the  most  senior  and  available  subordinate  officer, one  step 
below the position or grade, is assigned in a formal acting capacity, 
unless  the  efficiency and  effectiveness  of  that officer are  in  serious 
doubt.    In  the  absence  of  such  a  senior officer,  an  officer  two  (2) 
steps below the grade may be requested to act in that grade.   
 
(7) In  all  instances,  acting  appointments  are  not  expected  to  confer 
advantage for purposes of promotion.  
 
(8) If  the  acting  appointee  is  a  serving  officer  in  the  Civil  Service,  the 
acting  appointee  shall  be  paid  an  acting or  charge  allowance,  in 
accordance with the prevailing Government policy. 
 
(9) Where  the  acting  appointee  is  already a serving  officer  in  another 
public service organization, that acting appointee upon moving to 
the Civil Service, should not to be made worse off in terms of salary 
and fringe benefits. 
 

 
29 
 
(10) An  officer  formally  appointed  to  act  in  a  specific  position  may  be 
required to serve in that acting capacity for a period not exceeding 
one (1) year.   
 
(11) The necessary steps shall be initiated by the Appointing Authority to 
confirm that officer in the grade within the year, unless the work and 
conduct of the officer have been proven to be unsatisfactory.  
 
(12) If  the  formal  acting  appointee  holds  a  substantive  position  two  (2) 
steps below an acting position, the appointing authority shall within 
one  (1)  year  take  the  necessary  steps  to  appoint  a  substantive 
officer for the position. 
 
(13)  As much as practicable, an officer shall not serve in a formal acting 
capacity  for  more  than  one  (1) year. Chief  Directors  and  Heads  of 
Department shall be held personally liable for failure to comply with 
this provision. 
 
41. Confirmation of Formal Acting Appointment 
The Civil Service Council shall, in the course of the acting period (not later 
than  nine (9)  months  from  the  date  of  commencement  of  the  acting 
appointment),  initiate  action  for  the  confirmation  of  the  formal  acting 
appointee. 
 
(1) In  the  case  of Category “A” posts, if the work and conduct of the 
officer over  the  acting  period  are  adjudged  unsatisfactory  for 
confirmation, the Civil Service Council, shall in consultation with the 
Public Services Commission advise the President, accordingly. 
 

 
30 
 
(2) For  all other Categories  of  staff,  the  Chief  Director  or  Head  of 
Department  shall  inform  the  Civil  Service  Council of  the  need  to 
confirm  or  otherwise  to  enable  a decision  to  be  taken  on  the 
matter. 
 
42. Re-appointment  
(1) An  officer  who  has  resigned,  been  granted leave  of  absence  or 
retired   voluntarily,  may   be   re-appointed   into   the   Civil   Service, 
subject to the following conditions: 
 
(a) availability of vacancy; 
(b) must  have left  the  employment  of  the Civil  Service  in  good 
standing; 
(c) must have applied for the post; 
(d) must have passed an interview; 
(e) must have been declared medically fit; and, 
(f) must have passed security and other checks. 
 
(2) Previous service will be taken into account in selection only in as far 
as it demonstrates the officer’s suitability to undertake the duties of 
the  post  for  which  the officer is  applying.  Accordingly,  it  is  not 
automatic  that  the  officer will be  employed  into  the  grade,  in  the 
Civil  Service,  from which  the  officer  originally  left,  or  positions  in 
which   his   or   her   previous   seniority   colleagues are   currently 
encumbering.  
 
(3) The re-appointment of officers into the Civil Service shall be through 
the prescribed recruitment process in the Civil Service. All conditions 
in relation to new appointment equally apply to re-appointment. 
 

 
31 
 
43. Re-engagement 
(1) It is not automatic that a staff of the Civil Service who has reached 
the  compulsory  retirement age will  be  re-engaged  into  the  Civil 
Service. A  retired  staff of  the  Civil  Service may  be  re-engaged  on 
limited  terms  (post  retirement  contract)  in  accordance with  Article 
199(4) of the Constitution, subject to the following conditions: 
 
(a) exigencies of the service; 
(b) must have retired from the Civil Service in good standing; 
(c) must have been recommended by the Civil Service; and, 
(d) must be declared medically fit. 
 
(2) The following procedure shall be followed in the re-engagement of 
an officer on limited terms: 
(a) in  the case  of a Chief  Director,  the  Minister shall  make  a 
recommendation to the Head of Civil Service; 
(b) in  the  case  of a Director  or  Head  of  Department,  the  Chief 
Director shall  make  a  recommendation  to  the Head  of  the 
Civil Service; 
(c) the retired officer  to be  considered  for  re-engagement  shall 
provide evidence of medical fitness; 
(d) the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  consider  the  request  and 
make   appropriate   recommendations   to   the   Civil   Service 
Council; and, 
(e) the   Council   shall   consider   the   request,   and make the 
appropriate decision. 
 
 
 
 

 
32 
 
44. Re-instatement 
(1) An officer who has left the Service as a result of unfair termination or 
dismissal  shall  be  offered  appointment  on  re-instatement  terms, 
under any of the following conditions: 
 
(a) grant  of  official  pardon  by  the  President for a Category “A” 
post holder; 
(b) approval  of  a  petition or an  appeal  against  the  decision  of 
the  disciplinary  authority  by  the  Civil  Service  Council  for 
holder of a post below Category “A”; 
(c) favourable ruling by a court of competent jurisdiction; and, 
(d) on  the  order  of  the  National  Labour  Commission (Section  64 
of the Labour Act, 2003 (Act 651)). 
 
(2) The terms and conditions for reinstatement shall be as follows: 
 
(a) where  an  officer  has  been  granted  Presidential  pardon,  the 
grade  as  well  as  salary  and  other  related  conditions  will 
depend on the terms and conditions of the pardon; 
(b) where a petition has been upheld by the Council, the grade 
of  re-entry  as  well  as  the  salary  and other  related  conditions 
will be informed by the decision of the Council; 
(c) in the case of court ruling or an order of the National Labour 
Commission, the terms of the ruling or the order will apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33 
 
PART II 
LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
45. Learning and Development 
Learning   and   staff   development   are   essential   ingredients   for   the 
promotion  of efficiency,  quality  and  timely  service  delivery.  Heads  of 
Ministries  and Department shall ensure that each staff of the  Civil Service 
receives  at  least five  days (40  hours) of  formal  and  functional  training 
each year. 
 
(1) The   Head   of   the   Civil   Service,   Chief Directors   and   Heads   of 
Department   shall   facilitate   staff   training and   participation   in 
approved courses of study as  prescribed in the Scheme of Service, 
in    addition to    other    training    and   other    staff    development 
opportunities. 
 
(2) Chief  Directors  and Heads  of Department  shall  determine,  arrange 
and facilitate the participation of eligible staff of the Civil Service in 
training,   development   and   learning   programmes,   taking into 
consideration  the  provisions  in  their  respective  Schemes  of  Service, 
availability  of funds, identified  capacity building  needs  of  the staff, 
as indicated in the annual performance appraisal report, and other 
relevant conditions or circumstances of the Service. 
 
46. Venue for Training 
(1) A   staff   of   the   Civil   Service may   undergo   training   locally   in 
management  development  institutions  including  the Civil  Service 
Training   Centre, Ghana   Institute   of   Management   and   Public 
Administration (GIMPA), Management Development and 

 
34 
 
Productivity  Institute  (MDPI),  University  of  Ghana  Business  School 
(UGBS) and Legon  Centre  for  International  Affairs and  Diplomacy 
(LECIAD).  
 
(2) Government  may  sponsor staff  of  the  Civil  Service for  training 
abroad. 
 
47. Learning and Staff Development Opportunities 
The forms of training, development and learning opportunities include: 
 
(a) induction and orientation; 
(b) Scheme of Service training; 
(c) internship and attachments; 
(d) coaching and mentoring; 
(e) study tours; 
(f)        job rotation; 
(g) conferences, seminars, retreats and workshops; and, 
(h) e-learning (formal or informal). 
  
(1) Induction and Job Orientation  
Induction and job orientation shall be conducted by OHCS and the 
Ministry or Department,  within  the  first three  (3) months upon  the 
assumption   of   duty,   to   introduce   new employees to   the   Civil 
Service,   its   office   facilities,   functions,   structure,   policies,   rules, 
procedures,  work  ethic,  job  descriptions  and  filing of tax  returns, 
among other things. It is also meant to enable the worker to have a 
sense  of  belonging  to  the  Service  and  to  settle  down  as  quickly  as 
practicable. 
 
 

 
35 
 
(2) Scheme of Service Training 
(a) Staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall  be  trained  to  acquire requisite 
academic, professional and vocational knowledge, skills, and 
competencies  relevant  to  the performance  of  their  jobs.  This 
would enable them perform effectively and efficiently, as well 
as prepare them to take up higher responsibilities. 
 
(b) Scheme of Service training can take the following forms: 
i. degree, diploma or certificate courses; 
ii. on-the-job training; 
iii. continuous professional development courses; and, 
iv. competency and proficiency-based programmes. 
 
(c) Chief   Directors   and   Heads   of   Department   shall   prepare 
Scheme  of  Service  training  schedules  and  plans,  and  ensure 
that they are strictly adhered to.  Heads of Divisions  and Units 
shall  be  required  to  provide  inputs  for  the  preparation  of 
training schemes to meet individual functional needs.  
 
(3) Attachment and Internship 
Attachment   and   internship,   by   students   and   newly   qualified 
graduates of tertiary institutions, may be permitted for short periods. 
However,  it  is  advisable  that  interns  shall not  work  in sensitive areas 
of the Civil Service because of the temporary nature of their work. 
In  all  cases,  there  must  be  formal  letters  of  introduction  from the 
requesting  training  institution  for  the  consideration  and  approval of 
the Ministry or Department in the Civil Service.  
 
 

 
36 
 
(4) Mentoring and Coaching 
Mentoring and coaching  may  be  employed  to  build  the  skills  and 
competencies of staff of the Civil Service. 
 
a. Mentoring  is  a  dynamic  and  reciprocal  relationship  in  a  work 
environment where a more experienced, advanced and skillful 
career   officer   (mentor)   shall   provide assistance   to   a   less 
experienced,  less  advanced  and  less  skillful  officer  (mentee) 
who has the potential to develop in some specified capacity in 
order  to  contribute  to  the  attainment of  the  goals  of  the  Civil 
Service. 
 
b. Coaching may be employed as a systematically planned and 
direct guidance of staff of the Civil Service, by an experienced 
officer of  the Service,  to  learn  and  develop  specific  skills  that 
are  applied  in  the  workplace, and  therefore  translates  to 
clearly defined performance outcomes that are achieved over 
a short period of time. 
 
(5) Study Tour 
The  Civil  Service  may  employ  study  tour  to enable  officers  acquire 
basic  knowledge  through  experiential  learning.  This  approach will 
enable the officers explore various industries, cultures, practices and 
people. The Chief Director or Head of Department shall ensure that 
the learning goals of each study are always spelt out in the terms of 
reference of the study tour that is distributed to each learner, before 
the tour. 
 
 

 
37 
 
(6) Staff and Job Rotation  
Staff and job rotation may be used to make it flexible for personnel 
to  perform  various  duties  and  tasks in the  Civil  Service.  This  will 
involve  the  movement  of  personnel  in  a  series  of  planned job 
rotations  in  various  Divisions  and  Units  within  the  Ministries  and 
Departments.  
Staff   and   job   rotation   shall   be   done   in   accordance   with   an 
approved   rotation   plan and   shall   not be   used   as   a   punitive 
measure. 
 
(7) Conferences, Seminars, Retreats and Workshops 
The  Civil  Service organisations may  organize and  facilitate  the 
participation   of   staff   in conferences,   seminars,   retreats   and 
workshops to build the capacity of staff of the Civil Service. 
 
(8) E-Learning  
E-learning may  be  employed to  enable staff  of  the  Civil  Service 
learn   anytime   and   anywhere through   the   use   of all   forms of 
electronically   supported   learning   and   teaching   materials to 
enhance  their  skills  and  competencies for  effective  and  efficient 
performance of their official or professional duties. 
 
48. Responsibility of the OHCS 
(1) The Office  of  the  Head  of  Civil  Service shall organize  training  in 
subject  areas  that  are  Service-wide  in  nature and shall  monitor 
training arrangements for staff of the Civil Service. 
(2) The   OHCS   shall operationalize   the   implementation   of training 
courses    designed    to    improve    efficiency    of    officers    in    the 
Directorates.  

 
38 
 
49. Organisation of Training at Regional and District Levels 
(1)  For  the  purpose  of staff  development,  training  courses may be 
organized,  as  far  as  practicable,  at  selected regional  centres. 
Training  may,  however,  be  extended  to  the Districts,  subject  to 
availability of resources. 
 
(2)  Facilities may also be provided at the regional and district levels for 
the testing of candidates for appointment into the Civil Service. 
 
50. Responsibility of Chief Directors and Heads of Department 
Chief Directors and Heads of  Department  are  required  to develop  and 
implement  a  training  plan  for  all staff  in their Ministries  and  Departments. 
Such   training   shall   be   based   on   the   appraisal, Scheme   of Service 
requirements and relevant professional requirements.  
 
51. Head of Department and Approving Authority for Training 
A staff of the Civil Service shall be selected for training, approved under a 
Departmental Training Scheme as a requirement for promotion. It shall be 
mandatory for the Head of Department to give approval. 
 
52. Principles of Selection for Training 
(1) Selection  for  training  awards  shall  be  guided by  the needs  of  the 
Department or the Civil Service and the career development of the 
officer. 
 
(2) The selection of staff of the Civil Service for training shall be done in 
a transparent manner, bearing in mind the length of service, grade, 
position and training history of the officer,  as  well as  the exigencies 
of the Service. 

 
39 
 
(3)  The  number  of  officers  approved  for  training  should  at  no  time 
adversely  affect the  performance of  a Ministry,  Department  or  Unit 
in the Civil Service. 
 
53. Contents of Training Award 
A training award shall specify whether it is intended to: 
 
(a) qualify the officer for immediate promotion to a particular grade; 
(b) enhance  the  prospects  of  the eventual  promotion  of  the  officer to 
a particular grade; or, 
(c) enhance the officer’s efficiency in the present grade. 
 
54. Funding of Training and Development  
(1) The Civil Service shall bear the cost of Scheme of Service training of 
the Civil  Service. Accordingly,  the  Office  of  the  Head  of  Civil 
Service,   Ministries   and   Departments   shall,   on   an   annual   basis, 
budget for critical manpower development. 
 
(2) The  Office of  the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  endeavour  to 
source  funding from  both  local  and  foreign  sources for  training 
opportunities and sponsorship to supplement the annual budgetary 
allocation for staff development. 
 
55. Self-initiated Training (SIT) 
In view  of  the  growing  desire  of staff  of  the  Civil  Service to  add  value  to 
themselves   to   remain   competitive in   an   environment   of   limited   job 
opportunities,  there  is  an  increasing  number  of staff who,  through their 
own  individual  efforts,  gain  admission  into institutions  of  higher  learning 
and take upon themselves the payment of tuition and other fees.  

 
40 
 
Such  officers  may  be  eligible  for  sponsorship  in  the  form  of  payment  of 
their  salaries  and  other  benefits under  the  Study  Leave  with  Pay  policy  in 
the Civil Service. 
  
56. Bonding 
(1) Full  or  partially  sponsored  training  programmes  (tuition,  salaries, 
accommodation, etc.,   paid   by Government and   any   other 
awarding  body)  exceeding  three  (3)  months’  duration, shall 
generally attract a bond.  
 
(2) Before  proceeding for the  training  programme,  a  beneficiary  shall 
be   required   to   enter   into   a   bond   to   complete   the   training 
programme satisfactorily, return to the service and serve in the Civil 
Service for  the  period  specified in  the  bond.  There  shall  be  two  (2) 
guarantors for each bond. 
 
(3) The period of the bond will depend on the duration and location of 
the   training   programme.    Training   programmes   shall   attract   a 
minimum bond period of four (4) and not exceeding five (5) years.  
 
(4) The   Chief   Director   or   Head   of   Department   shall   ensure   the 
completion and signing of the bond forms by the applicants before 
granting approval for the study leave facility to an applicant.  
 
(5) Upon  completion  of  a  training  programme,  a staff  of  the Civil 
Service who  submits  an  application  for  upgrading  or  conversion 
shall  enclose  a  copy  of  completed  bond  form  as  part  of  the 
supporting documents for the request. 
 

 
41 
 
57. Redemption of Bond 
(1) A  sponsored staff  of  the  Civil  Service who  defaults  in  serving  the 
required  bond  period  shall  be  made  to  pay  the  full  bond  sum  for 
the  number  of  years  in  default. It  should  be  noted  that  this  is to 
liquidate damages and not serve as penalty. 
 
(2) A  sponsored staff  of  the  Civil  Service who,  on  his/her  own volition, 
fails to complete the period of study shall pay the full cost of training 
including  any  salaries  and  allowances  received  for  the  number  of 
years spent on the course.  
 
(3) The value of the bond shall be equivalent to the full cost of training 
including   salaries   and   allowances received   during   the   period, 
revised  for  inflation  and  currency  fluctuations  plus  a  compound 
interest at the prevailing interest rate. 
 
(4) A sponsored staff of the Civil Service who has completed the course 
of study and fails  to return to work shall be required to redeem the 
bond.  The value  of the bond shall be equivalent to the full cost of 
training   including   salaries   and   allowances   received   during   the 
period,   revised   for   inflation   and   currency   fluctuations   plus   a 
compound interest at the prevailing interest rate. 
 
58. Obligation of Bonding 
(1) Where  the staff  of  the  Civil  Service fails  to  fulfil  the  terms  of  the 
bond, the guarantors of the officer shall be required to redeem the 
bond  by  paying,  with  interest,  the  total  amount  expended  in 
sponsoring the officer. 

 
42 
 
(2) In  addition,  legal  action may  be  taken  against  an  officer  who 
breaches any of the conditions of the bond. 
 
 
PART III 
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 
 
59.   Performance Management Policy 
(1) Performance  Management  shall  be  an  integral  part  of  the  human 
resource management system in the Civil Service to ensure that the 
Service delivers on its object. 
 
(2) The implementation of the Performance Management System shall 
be guided by the Performance Management Policy that has  been 
developed  for  the  Ghana  Public  Services by the Public  Services 
Commission.  
 
(3) The  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  ensure  the  implementation  of  a 
robust  Performance  Management  System  in  the  Civil  Service  to 
guarantee    effective    and    efficient    service    delivery    for    the 
achievement of the mandate of the Service. 
 
(4) Chief Directors shall sign performance agreement with the Head of 
the Civil Service and endorsed by their respective Sector Ministers. 
 
(5) Chief  Directors  shall  sign  performance  agreement  with  their line 
Directors, Heads of  Departments,  other Directors and  analogous 
grades and endorsed by their respective Ministers.  
 

 
43 
 
(6) Deputy   Directors and analogous   grades   and   below   shall   be 
appraised    by    their    respective    supervisors    using    the Staff 
Performance Planning, Review and Appraisal Form. 
 
60. Annual Performance Management Cycle 
(1) The Head of the Civil Service shall issue guidelines and templates for 
the   implementation   cycle of   the   Civil   Service Performance 
Management System. 
 
(2) Chief   Directors   shall   submit   annual   performance   agreement 
evaluation    report    on    Directors,    Heads    of    Department    and 
analogous grades. 
 
(3) Chief Directors shall submit an annual Programmed Composite Staff 
Appraisal Report to the Office of the Head of the Civil Service. 
 
(4) Signing   of   Performance   Agreements   and   completion   of   Staff 
Performance Appraisal Report shall be mandatory for all staff of the  
Service. 
 
(5) Prescribed  penalties  shall  be  applicable  for  non-completion  of  the 
process and non-performance. 
 
61. Performance Management Cycle 
The  Performance  Management  Cycle  is  from  January  to  December  of 
each year and shall comprise four (4) phases.  
 
 
 

 
44 
 
 
(1) Phase One – Performance Planning 
a) Performance planning process defines the job of a staff of the 
Civil   Service, sets   performance   standards,   targets   and 
allocates  resources  to  ensure  effective  performance  within a 
specific  period.  There  is  the  need  for  an  agreement  on  the 
targets set to ensure ownership. 
b) The  Performance  Planning  is  expected  to  be  carried  out  in 
January each year. It involves a meeting between supervisors 
and their subordinates to establish key work goals, objectives 
and  behaviours  that  support  achievement  of  the  strategic 
plans and corporate objectives of Ministries and 
Departments. 
c) On  the  basis  of the  strategic  plans  and  corporate  objectives 
of  the  Ministries  and  Departments,  the  Head  of the  Civil 
Service  shall  hold  discussions  with  each  Chief  Director  and 
agree   on   performance   targets.   The   performance   targets 
would  be  the  deliverables  in  the  Performance  Agreement 
between  the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  and  the  respective 
Chief Director. 
d)  Chief  Directors  shall  in  turn  discuss and sign  performance 
agreement  with  their  respective  Directors and  analogous 
grades. 
e) Directors  shall  agree  on  work  plans  with  their immediate 
subordinates  and  the  process  shall  cascade  down  to  the 
lowest ranked officer in the Civil Service. 
 
 
 

 
45 
 
(2) Phase Two – Progress Review 
(a) This    phase    requires    that    supervisors    meet    with    their 
subordinate  staff  in  July  to  review  the  progress  in  achieving 
the   objectives   and   targets   set   out   in   the   performance 
agreements  and  work  plans,  provide  initial  feedback and 
make    any    required adjustments    to    the    performance 
agreements and work plans. 
(b) The  Head  of  the  Civil  Service,  Chief  Directors  and  supervisors 
across the grades shall meet their respective subordinate staff 
for the progress review in July. 
 
(3) Phase Three – Review and Appraisal 
a) In December  supervisors  (appraisers)  will  provide  a  written 
evaluation  of  the  performance  their  subordinate  staff  with 
regard to  the  achievement  of  the  goals,  objectives  and 
behaviours set out in the performance agreements and work 
plans for the year. 
(b) The written  evaluation  of a staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall 
become a permanent part of the record of the officer in the 
Service.  
(c) The end of year review shall entail the following: 
i) assessment process; 
ii) outcome and communication of evaluation results; 
iii) response from the appraisee, and, 
iii)  a final written evaluation report by the supervisor. 
(d) The  Head  of  the  Civil  Service,  Chief  Directors and  supervisors 
across the grades shall review and assess the performance of 
their subordinate staff and provide appraisal reports on each 
appraisee. 

 
46 
 
(4) Phase Four- Decision–Making 
a) The  Civil  Service  shall  recognise  and  reward staff  of the  Civil 
Service who  perform  satisfactorily  as  a  motivation  to  sustain 
and improve upon their future performance. The reward may 
include  recognition,  promotion,  training,  offer  of  recreation, 
among others. 
b)  However,   any   financial   reward   shall   be   in   tandem   with 
existing  Government  pay  policy  on  matching  remuneration 
with performance.  
c) The  Head  of the  Civil  Service,  Chief  Directors and  supervisors 
shall identify poor, substandard or unacceptable 
performance.   Supervisors   shall   address   first-time   minor or 
marginal performance issues through performance 
counselling and coaching.  
d) In  the  case  of  major substandard  performance, the  Head  of 
the Civil Service, Chief Directors and supervisors shall: 
i) develop   performance   improvement   plan   including 
interventions   such   as   career   counselling,   coaching, 
mentoring, retraining, developmental opportunities and 
re-assignment where appropriate; and, 
ii) dismiss  the officer on  grounds  of  inefficiency  if  desired 
improvement is not realised within two (2) years. 
 
62. Annual Performance Reports of Chief Directors  
Sector  Ministers  shall submit  performance  assessment  reports on  Chief 
Directors to the Office of the Head of the Civil Service.  
 
 
 

 
47 
 
63. Petitions 
If  a staff  of  the  Civil  Service disagrees  with  an  evaluation  and  cannot 
resolve  the  disagreement  with  the  supervisor  (appraiser),  the  officer  may 
appeal  for  a  review  of  the  evaluation  based  on  the appeal  process 
provided for in the appropriate guidelines provided for in the Civil Service 
Handbook consistent   with   the   principles   in the Public   Service   Staff 
Performance Planning, Review and Decision-making Handbook.  
  
64. Dispute resolutions 
The  Head of  the  Civil  Service and Chief  Directors  shall  resolve  disputes  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  in  the Civil  Service Handbook  consistent 
with  the  principles  in  the Public  Service  Staff  Performance  Planning, 
Review and Decision-making Handbook. 
 
65. Merit Pay Award Scheme 
           (1) The  Office  of  the  Head  of  the  Civil Service,  in  consultation  with  the 
Fair  Wages  and  Salaries  Commission  (FWSC),  shall  operate  a  Merit 
Pay  Award  Scheme,  under  which  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  whose 
performance appraisal reports  show  exceptional  achievement  of 
targets for the year, shall be rewarded. 
 
(2) The   Civil   Service   Council   shall   determine   the   implementation 
guidelines for the Merit Pay Awards Scheme. 
 
66. Merit Awards Scheme  
           (1) The  Office  of  the Head  Civil  Service  shall  establish  a  service-wide 
Merit  Award  Scheme  to  recognize  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  who 
demonstrate    outstanding    performance    in    their duties    and 
responsibilities. 

 
48 
 
(2) Staff  of  the  Service  who  demonstrate  outstanding  performance 
shall be  presented  with  citations,  plaques  and  other  gifts  at  the 
Annual Civil Service Week Celebration. 
 
67. Eligibility for Merit Award 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil Service  who  has  demonstrated  outstanding 
performance,  continuous  initiative,  exemplary  conduct and  hard 
work  throughout  his  career  or  period  of  assessments  is  eligible  for 
nomination and consideration for a Merit Award. 
 
(2) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  may be  eligible  for  a  Merit  Award 
throughout   his   working   career,   provided   for   each   period   of 
assessment the officer maintains an outstanding performance. 
 
68. Nominations for Merit Award 
(1) Chief  Directors  and  Heads  of  Department  shall  make  nominations 
for  Merit Award  on  the  basis  of  the  performance  of  the staff  under 
their supervision.  
 
(2) Chief Directors and   Heads   of   Department   shall   complete   in 
duplicate  the  nomination  forms  that  would  be  prescribed  by  the 
Head of the Civil Service.  
  
(3) A Ministerial Selection Committee shall consider nominations for the 
awards.  
  
69. National Awards Committee  
The Office of the Head of the Civil Service shall appoint a National Awards 
Committee  for  the  Merit  Award  Scheme  that  will  promote  uniformity  of 

 
49 
 
standards  of  assessment and  issue  guidelines  for  selection  of  award 
winners. 
 
70. Ministerial Selection Committee on Merit Award 
(1). The   Management   of   the   Ministry   shall   appoint   a   Selection 
Committee to operate the Merit Scheme at the Ministerial level. 
   
(2). The   membership   of the   Ministerial   Selection   Committee   shall 
comprise the following:  
 
  (i) Chief Director                              - Chairman; 
 (ii) a representative of the Administrative  
and Executive Classes                           -  Member; 
 (iii) a representative of the  
Professional/Technical Grades        -  Member; 
 (iv) a representative of the CLOGSAG    -  Member;      
                      and, 
(v) the Human Resource Director or representative               -  Secretary. 
 
 
PART IV 
STAFF PROGRESSION 
 
71. Promotion 
Promotion is the progression from one position to another of a higher level, 
usually with a higher responsibility. In line with the principles of fairness and 
merit,  a staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall  be  promoted  only  if  the  officer 
satisfies  the  prescribed  conditions  for  advancement  into  the  next  higher 
grade in which a vacancy has been declared.  
 

 
50 
 
72. Eligibility for Promotion 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service will  be  eligible  for  promotion  only  when 
the officer has satisfied all the necessary requirements for promotion 
specified in the Scheme of Service of the Civil Service. 
 
(2) A staff of the Civil Service shall satisfy the underlisted requirements in 
order to be eligible for promotion. 
(a) Availability of vacancy in the promotion grade 
(b) Confirmation of appointment 
(c) Serving the required number of years in the current grade 
(d) Satisfactory work and conduct 
(e) Passing a prescribed examination, where necessary 
(f) Membership of a professional body, where necessary 
(g) Success at the required interview, where necessary. 
 
73. Promotion Register  
(1) Ministries and Departments  shall  compile  and  update  regularly 
Promotion   Registers   which   shall contain   the   following personal 
details: 
 
(a) name of officer; 
(b) date of birth;  
(c) grade;  
(d) date of first appointment;  
(e) qualification; and, 
(f)      promotability; 
i. normal turn; 
ii. out of turn; or, 
iii. non suitability. 

 
51 
 
(2) Ministries   and   Departments   shall   prepare   Promotion   Schedules 
derived  from  Promotion  Registers  of  all  eligible  officers  due  for 
promotion in the ensuing year by 30
th
 November of each year and 
forward same to the Office of the Head of the Civil Service. 
 
(3) The  Promotion  Schedules  of Ministries  and  Departments  shall  be in 
two (2) parts. 
(a) A schedule showing officers in the General Class 
(b) A schedule showing officers in the Specialist or Departmental 
grades 
 
74. Procedure for Promotions  
(1) In the case of a vacancy in a Category ’A’ post, the Chief Director 
shall make recommendations on any staff of the Civil Service to the 
Head of the Civil Service who shall submit his comments to the Civil 
Service  Council  and  the  Civil  Service Council,  in  consultation  with 
the  Public  Services  Commission, shall advise  the  President  on  the 
matter. 
 
(2) In  the case of vacancy in a Category ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts not in the 
General Class,  the  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  shall 
consult  with the  Head of  the  Civil  Service  to  conduct  interviews  for 
all  eligible  officers and  submit  the  selection  report  to  the Head  of 
the  Civil  Service,  who  shall  make  his  recommendations  to  the  Civil 
Service Council. 
 
(3) In the case of a vacancy in a Category ‘B and ‘C’ posts in  the 
General Class, the Office of the Head of Civil Service shall conduct 

 
52 
 
interviews of all eligible officers and submit the recommendations to 
the Civil Service Council. 
  
(4) Promotion  to  Category  ‘A’  Posts  shall  be  initiated  by  the  Chief 
Director. 
 
(5)   Recommendations for promotion submitted to the Head of the Civil 
Service for processing shall indicate: 
(a) list  of  officers  showing  the  respective  dates  of  their  previous 
promotion; 
(b) vacancies in the grade; and, 
(c) submission   of   the   last   two   (2)   consecutive years’  Staff 
Performance Appraisal Reports on the candidates (submitted 
at least six months before their recommendation). 
 
(6)  The   Head   of   the   Civil   Service   shall   submit   the   proposals   with 
comments  to  the  Civil  Service  Council  which  shall,  in  consultation 
with     the     Public     Services     Commission     make     appropriate 
recommendations to the President. 
 
75. Methods of Promotion 
Promotions in Civil Service shall be by any of the following methods, which 
shall be determined by the Appointing Authority concerned. 
(a) assessment of documents, dissertations and thesis;  
(b) assessment interviews; 
(c) results of prescribed examinations; and, 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed period of service. 
 
 

 
53 
 
76. Assessment Interviews 
(1) The  Office  of  the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  establish  a  Central 
Staff Appointment Committee for the Civil Service. 
                                                                                                           
(2) The  Staff  Appointment  Committee  shall  advise  the  Civil  Service 
Council on the selection of suitable candidates for appointment. 
 
(3) In  the discharge  of  its  functions,  the  Staff  Appointment  Committee 
shall be guided by the staffing norms and Administrative Instructions 
of the Civil Service. 
 
77. Composition of Staff Appointments Committee 
(1) The Staff Appointments Committee shall be composed of: 
 
(a) Chief Director of OHCS as Chairman;   
(b) a representative from the organisation of the candidate, who 
shall be senior in rank to the candidate(s); 
(c) a member of the relevant professional body; 
(d) a representative of the Public Services Commission; and, 
(e) one  (1)  other officer  not  below  the  rank  of  Assistant  Director 
IIA and    analogous, and    performing    human    resource 
management functions shall be the Secretary. 
 
(2) The composition of an Assessment Interview Panel may be varied to 
suit the special requirements of the organization. 
 
(3) Notwithstanding   (1),   an Interview   Panel   membership shall   be 
between three (3) and five (5). 
 
 

 
54 
 
(4) In order to ensure uniform standard assessment of Category ‘B’ and 
‘C’ candidates, promotion interviews shall be organized at Regional 
Headquarters at the  instance  of  Regional  Coordinating  Directors. 
Assessment shall be  in  conformity  with  the  prescribed  Assessment 
Format. 
 
78. Promotions Based on Results of Prescribed Examinations 
(1) An examination shall not be conducted for grades where there are 
no vacancies. 
(2) Heads  of Class are  obliged  to  organize  in-service and  other  pre-
examination courses for their staff. 
(3) The  results  of  prescribed  examinations  shall  be  the  bases  for  all 
promotions. 
(4) The prescribed examination shall include: 
a.  Limited  and  Competitive  Examinations  conducted  by  the 
Public Services Commission;  
 
b.  Secretarial Examinations conducted by: 
i.  Government Secretarial School; 
ii.  NACVET; and 
iii.  NVTI. 
 
  c. Institute for Technical Supervision 
i. National Craftsmen Certificate; 
ii. Trade Test Certificates; and 
iii. Proficiency Certificates 
 
d.  Vocational Examinations conducted by NVTI  
iv. National Craftsmen Certificate; 

 
55 
 
v. Trade Test Certificates; and 
vi. Proficiency Certificates 
 
e.  Technical    and    Vocational    Examinations    by    Ministry    of 
Education   (Education   Division,   Technical   Universities   and 
Polytechnics) 
i. Higher National Diploma 
ii. IMA (Catering) 
iii. 076/1 and 706/2 
iv. Technical Engineering Certificates 
v. City and Guilds Certificates 
 
f.  Competency Based   Examination conducted   by   the   Civil 
Service Training School.  
 
79. Promotions Based on Satisfactory Completion of a Minimum Period of  
Service 
Promotions  in the  grades based  on  the  satisfactory  completion  of  a 
minimum period of service shall be specified in the Scheme of Service. 
 
80. Promotion Based on Acquisition of Membership of a Recognised  
Professional Body  
Where  applicable,  a staff  of  the  Civil  Service may  be  promoted  upon 
acquisition of membership of a recognised Professional Body, as specified 
in the Professional Bodies Registration Act, 1973 (NRCD 143).) 
 
 
 
 

 
56 
 
81. Effective Date of Promotion 
Unless  the Civil  Service  Council otherwise directs,  the  effective date  of 
promotion   of   a staff   of   the   Civil   Service shall   be   determined   in 
accordance with the following rules. 
(1)   a promotion shall not take effect earlier than the date upon which 
the vacancy occurs, or upon which the officer concerned became 
qualified for promotion, whichever is the later; 
(2)  a promotion  shall  not  take  effect before  the  date  of  the  order 
authorizing the promotion by the Appointing Authority; and, 
(3)  a promotion shall not take effect before the date on which the staff 
assumes duty;  provided that a promotion  may  be  effective  before 
the date on which the staff actually assumes the new duties of the 
post where, through no fault of his, he is unable to assume duty  on 
the date of promotion proposed; and to delay his promotion would 
adversely affect his seniority relative to other staff of the Civil Service 
promoted at the same time. 
 
82. Notional Date 
In cases where it is necessary to back-date promotions in order to restore 
seniority, a notional date shall be given. No arrears of salary shall be paid 
in  this  case.  The  notional  date  may  not  be  more  than two (2)  years  from 
the substantive date. 
 
83. Substantive Date 
Where it  is  necessary  to  recommend  a  notional  date  for  promotion,  the 
substantive   promotion  date   should   not   be   earlier   than   the date   of 
authorization   of   the   promotion,   or   in   accordance   with   prevailing 
Government policy.  Salary  arrears  shall  be  paid  with  effect from  the 
substantive promotion date. 

 
57 
 
84. Other Promotions 
(1) Promotions in Categories ‘C’, ‘D’ and ‘E’ shall be effective from the 
date: 
a. the officer became eligible for promotion; and, 
b. the vacancy into which the officer in being promoted occurred 
and shall not be earlier than 1 above. 
 
(2)  A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service who  has  earned  his  promotion  by  a 
qualifying  examination  shall be promoted  effective  from  the  date 
of  the  release  of  the  examination  results but  not  earlier  than  the 
date of the occurrence of the vacancies. 
 
(3) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service who  qualifies  for  promotion  on  transfer 
from  a sub-professional Class shall be  deemed  to  have  been 
promoted  to  the  new  grade  on  the  date  of  the  release  of  the 
examination  results,  i.e.  date  of  graduation, provided this  is  not 
earlier than the date of the occurrence of the vacancies. 
 
(4) A  staff  of  the  Civil Service who  becomes  partially disabled  in  the 
course  of  duty  shall  be  promoted  on  the  basis  of  satisfactory work 
and    conduct    only,    e.g.    exempted    from    examinations    and 
assessment interviews 
 
(5) A staff of the Civil Service who goes on a departmentally-sponsored 
or approved course, may have that officer’s promotion back-dated 
with  notional  effect  from  the  effective  date  of  the  respective 
seniority group  but the substantive  date  of  the  promotion shall  be 
the date of resumption of duty. However, where the officer exceeds 
the  normal  duration  of  the  course,  on  the  officer’s  own  accord 

 
58 
 
without due notification or approval from the Office of the Head of 
the Civil Service, the officer shall lose the seniority and the effective 
date of the promotion shall be the date of the promotion interview.  
 
(6)  The   effective   date   of   promoitiion   for   an   officer   who   failed   a 
promotion  assessment  (interview) shall  be six  (8) months after  the 
officer failed the previous interview.  
 
(7)  An  officer  who  fails  an  assessment  two  (2) consecutive times  will 
remain  on  their  current  grade  for two  (2) years  and  placed  on  a 
Performance Improvement Programme for two (2) years after which 
will be presented for reconsideration.  
 
85. Trial Period 
(1) The  promotion  of staff to  posts  in  the  Service  shall  be  subject  to  a 
trial period of six (6) months. 
 
(2) An  officer  who  cannot  serve  the  mandatory  trial  period before 
compulsory retirement shall not be promoted.  
(3) In  the  case  of  an officer who  is  due  to  retire  in  less  than  six  (6) 
months,  and  if  through  no  fault  of  his,  his  promotion is unduly 
delayed after he had become eligible for promotion, the period of 
the service or the delay should count towards the trial period.  
 
(4) In the case of an officer in an acting assignment, if he has acted in 
a post, to which he is being considered for promotion the period of 
his service in that post should count towards his trial period. 
 

 
59 
 
(5) Where  the  promotion  is  likely  to  be  backdated  beyond  six  (6) 
months  from  the  date  of  compulsory  retirement  of  the  officer,  the 
officer shall be promoted. 
 
(6) If  at  the expiration  of  his  trial  period,  the  Head  of  Department 
determines that the performance of the staff has been satisfactory, 
the Head  of Department may recommend the confirmation of the 
officer in the new position. 
 
(7) If on  the  basis  of  the  performance  of  the newly  promoted  officer, 
the Head of Department is of the opinion that the staff should revert 
to   his   former   grade,   the   Head   of   Department   shall make 
appropriate recommendation to the Head of the Civil Service. 
 
(8) The Head of the Civil Service shall consider whether the staff should, 
on  the  expiration  of  the  trial  period,  be  confirmed  in his  promotion 
or should revert to his previous grade. 
 
(9) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service holding  a  post  on  trial  is  not  eligible  for 
consideration for further promotion until he has been confirmed.  
 
86. Seniority 
(1) Seniority   between staff holding   posts   with   the   same salary 
conditions   shall   be   determined   according   to their   respective 
seniority  dates  or,  if  those  dates  are  the  same,  according  to  their 
previous seniority. 
 

 
60 
 
(2) Seniority between staff holding posts with different salary conditions 
shall  be  determined  according to  the  salary  conditions  of  the 
respective posts. 
 
(3) If  any  question  arises  as  to  the  seniority  of staff relative to  the 
seniority  of  a  number  of other staff, it  shall be  determined  by  the 
Civil Service Council. 
 
87. Petition Against Decision by Appointing Authority 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service who is aggrieved by a decision made in a 
matter relating to his appointment or promotion by any Appointing 
Authority other than the President may petition the Head of the Civil 
Service. 
(2) A  petition  against  a  decision  of  the President  may  be  made  for  a 
review, and if after the review, the petitioner is not satisfied, he may 
appeal to the courts. 
(3) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service who  may feel aggrieved  as  a  result  of 
supersession, delayed promotion, etc., may submit a petition to the 
Appointing Authority for redress. 
(4) Only one such petition shall be allowed. 
 
88. Conversion and Upgrading 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service may  be  converted  if upon  obtaining a 
higher  academic  or  professional  qualification  the  officer  applies  to 
the Head of the Civil Service to move from the current class of posts 
to  another  one  within  the  Civil  Service  (for  example,  from  the 
Secretarial Class to the Administrative Class) in which the officer has 
expressed interest.  
 

 
61 
 
(2) Upgrading on the other hand, applies to a situation where a staff of 
the Civil Service, upon acquiring a qualification or certification, from 
an  approved  training  programme  is  moved  to  a  higher position  or 
grade within the hierarchy of the officer’s class of posts. 
 
89. Conditions for Conversion or Upgrading 
A   staff   of   the   Civil   Service,   who   acquires   a   higher academic   and 
professional qualification, either through an approved self-initiated course 
of study or a sponsored training programme may be converted if: 
 
(a) the  Scheme  of  Service  of  the  Ministry  or  Department  provides  for 
the conversion; 
(b) there is  a vacancy  in  the  position or  grade  into  which  the  officer  is 
to be considered for conversion or upgrading; 
(c) the  course of  study  is  relevant  to  the  requirements  of  the  Civil 
Service, the officer’s current  or future  job  and  has  been  approved 
by  the  Civil Service  Council  before  the  commencement  of  the 
course; 
(d) there is no pending disciplinary case against the officer; 
(e) evidence is provided to show that the officer on completion of the 
course, has started serving the bond; 
(f) the certification awarded to the officer has been verified; and, 
(g) the  officer  is  successful  at  an  interview,  or  a  prescribed  graduate-
entry examination, where necessary or applicable. 
 
90. Placement and Effective Date for Conversion or Upgrading 
(1) A staff  of  the  Civil  Service in  the  sub-professional  grades,  upon 
acquiring a degree from an accredited tertiary institution and other 
recognised professional body shall be placed on the initial grade of 
the professional grade.  

 
62 
 
 
(2) The  effective  date of  conversion  or  upgrading  shall  not  be  tied  to 
the date  of  the  award  of  the  certificate,  but  rather  to  the  date  of 
availability  of  vacancy  in  the grade, as  well  as  the  date of  the 
interview for the conversion or upgrading. 
 
(3) The conversion or upgrading of staff to posts in the Service shall be 
subject to a trial period of six (6) months. 
 
 
 

 
63 
 
CHAPTER 3: MOVEMENTS WITHIN THE CIVIL SERVICE 
PART I 
POSTINGS     
 
91. Definition of Posting 
 A  posting  is  a change  of  location of  an  officer  within  the  Service.  It  may, 
or may not imply increased responsibilities. 
 
92. Inter-station Postings 
Posting of officers shall be kept to a minimum, compatible with efficiency 
and the exigencies of the Service. 
 
93. 5 Considerations for Postings 
Where it becomes necessary to post an officer: 
 
(a) reasonable  notice,  consistent  with  the  exigencies of  the  Service, 
should be given to the officer before he moves to his new station; 
(b)   posting shall not be resorted to as punitive measure; 
(c) as  far  as  practicable,  a  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  be rotated 
within the Service or the Divisions of a Department to acquire an all-
round experience in the Service; 
(d) posting shall be done as much as possible to coincide with the 
academic calendar to enable staff of the Civil Service place their 
wards in schools at the new location; and, 
(e) the Ministry or Department concerned should give every assistance 
in resettling the officer at his new station. 
 
 
 
 

 
64 
 
94. Posting Authorities 
(1)  Postings shall be made in the following manner. 
 
(a) The Head of Civil Service shall be responsible for inter-sectoral   
postings of staff of the Civil Service. 
(b) The Bureaucratic Head shall be responsible for the posting of 
Departmental Grade Officers within the sector Ministry. 
 
(2)  Young  officers,  particularly  those  in  the  Junior  Grades  shall,  on  first 
appointment, be posted where practicable, near their home town. 
 
95. Posting of Married Civil Service Staff   
Where a staff of the Civil Service is married to another officer, the couple 
shall, on request, be posted to the same station. If the officer has to move 
to  another  station,  the  spouse  shall, on request,  be  posted  to  the  new 
station or failing that, as near to the new station as possible. 
 
96. Postings When on Course 
Where an officer is undergoing an approved course of study, he shall not 
be posted out of his station without his consent. 
 
97. Transparency in Postings 
The  Civil  Service  Council  shall  be  responsible  for  ensuring that  there  is 
justice and equity in all postings and transfers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
65 
 
PART II 
SERVICE WITH AGENCIES OUTSIDE THE CIVIL SERVICE 
 
98. Transfers 
(1)  Transfer within the Civil Service is a movement of an officer from one 
Service  to  the  other  and  may  not  necessarily  involve a  change  of 
designation and duties. 
 
(2) Transfers may not be effected unless a firm offer of appointment has 
been made to an officer,  with the written approval of the Head  of 
Civil Service and the consent of the affected officer. 
 
(3) The    appointing authority    is    responsible    for    transferring    a 
Departmental  grade  officer  from  one  Department  to  another  or 
from one grade to another in the same Ministry or Department (e.g. 
transfer  of an officer  from  the  grade  of  Exhibition  Officer  in  the 
Ministry  of  Information  to  the  grade  of  Poster  Artist  within  the  same 
Ministry). 
 
99. Re-transfer 
A  staff of  the  Civil  Service  who  has sought  approval  to  work  in  an 
approved  employment  may,  with  the  prior approval  of  the  appointing 
authority,   revert   to   his   former   employment subject   to   availability   of 
vacancy and the procedures of recruitment. 
 
100. Service with Approved International Organisation 
The authority for approving the employment of A staff of the Civil Service 
by international organisations, i.e. the UN, the AU, ECOWAS or any other of 

 
66 
 
the  Specialized  Agencies,  or  approved international organisation  is the 
President; on the advice of the Civil Service Council.  
 
101. Categories of Approved Employment 
A staff of the Civil Service may,  with the prior approval of the appointing 
authority,   be   transferred   from   that   post   to   the   following   approved 
employment:  
(a) any  Institution  approved  by the  Civil  Service  Council  on  the 
recommendation of the Head of Civil Service and., 
(b) any other public organization where his services are needed. 
 
102. Pre-transfer Arrangements 
Before the appointing authority is approached for the necessary approval 
for transfer, the two (2) agencies or authorities concerned shall first agree 
tentatively that the officer in question is well qualified for his  new position 
and that he can conveniently be released. In the case of members of the 
General  Class,  copies  of  the  application  shall  be  served  on  the  Head  of 
the Class. 
 
103. Definition of Secondment 
(1) Secondment  is  one  of  several  ways  of  filling  vacancies,  albeit 
temporarily, especially  where  organisations  are  in  dire  need  of 
certain  skills which  are  urgently  required to  enable  them  function 
effectively. 
 
(2) Through  secondment,  the Public Services makes  provision  for  an 
organisation  which  has  the  requisite  skilled  personnel  to spare,  to 
loan  that  personnel  to  another  organisation  at  the  request  of  the 
recipient organisation, or upon Government directive. 

 
67 
 
(3) In these Instructions, secondment is either a movement of a staff of 
the Civil  Service from  the  Service  to  an  approved  establishment 
outside the Service, or a movement of an officer from an approved 
establishment to the Civil Service. 
 
104. Conditions for Secondment 
(1)  An  officer  on  secondment  retains his  rights and  privileges  as  if  he 
were still serving in his substantive post in his parent organisation. He 
is  expected  to  carry  out  the  instructions  of  his  superior in  the  foster 
organisation to which he is seconded.  
 
(2) Even though he is not a permanent employee of that organisation, 
he is subject to its disciplinary procedures.  
 
(3) Where  disciplinary  action  may  lead  to  a  major  penalty,  disciplinary 
action may be taken only in consultation with the Head of his parent 
organisation. 
 
(4) An  officer  on  secondment  will  be paid  full  salary  by  the  receiving 
agency and will also be eligible for allowances attached to his new 
assignment provided  they  do  not  duplicate  what  the  officer  is 
receiving from the parent organisation. 
 
(5) Secondment   shall  not   normally   exceed   two (2) years, with   an 
extension  period  of  one (1) more  year  on  approval,  after  which 
period  the  officer  shall  exercise  his  option  to transfer  to the  agency 
or return to the Civil Service or be deemed to have been transferred 
to  the  agency,  and  accordingly  be  informed by the  approving 
authority. 

 
68 
 
105. Secondment to an International Organisation 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  may be  seconded to  an international 
organization   including   a   foreign   Government, United Nations, 
Commonwealth  Secretariat,  African  Union,  ECOWAS, a  specialized 
international agency or an approved international oraganisation. 
 
(2) The authority for approving the secondment is the President, acting 
on the advice of the Civil Service Council. 
 
(3) the  conditions  for  granting  approval  for  secondment  of  a  staff of 
the Civil Service to a foreign entity include: 
 
(a) a  formal  request from  the  foreign  entity  to  the  Ministry  or 
Department   through   the   Ministry   responsible   for   Foreign 
Affairs; and, 
(b) the Civil Service Council shall consider the request taking into 
consideration  the  exigencies  of  the  work  within  the  Service, 
and  where appropriate  recommend  to  the  President  for 
approval. 
 
106. Staff of a Department Converted into a Corporation 
(1)  When  a  Department  has  been converted  into  a  Corporation,  and 
arrangements for  the  conversion  of  its  personnel  to  a  corporation 
status have not been finalized, the affected staff of the Civil Service 
shall be regarded as being on secondment to the Corporation, and 
nominal   provision for   their   salaries   shall   be   made   under   their 
Ministry’s Annual Compensation Budget. 
 

 
69 
 
(2) Where a whole Department  becomes a public corporation, a staff 
of the Civil Service engaged in the Department shall, at their option, 
either  transfer  to  the  Corporation  or be  redeployed  elsewhere 
within the Civil Service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
70 
 
CHAPTER 4: ETHICS, VALUES AND CODE OF CONDUCT 
 
107. Loyalty of Staff of the Civil Service 
(1)   Staff   of   the   Civil   Service shall   show   loyalty   to   the   State,   the 
Government and the Civil Service. 
 
(2)  Staff of the Civil Service shall discharge, diligently, all assigned duties 
and responsibilities for purposes of contributing to the achievement 
of the object of the Civil Service. 
 
108. Ethical Values in the Civil Service 
           A Ministry or Department shall: 
 
a) organize  periodic  workshops and seminars  to  sensitise staff  of  the 
Civil Service to instill the core values of the Civil Service in the staff of 
the Ministry or Department; and, 
 
b)  hold    staff    durbars    to    provide    updates,    make    important 
announcements,  share  information  and  solicit feedback  from  staff 
for  purposes  of  raising  their  consciousness  on  the need  to  uphold 
the values of the Civil Service. 
 
109. Political Activity  
(1) A staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall  at  all  times  demonstrate  political 
neutrality and anonymity in the performance of the functions of the 
office.  
 
(2) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall not demonstrate  any party-political 
affiliation, openly participate  in  partisan  political  activities,  seek 
political office while in active service.  

 
71 
 
(3) A staff of the Service shall not use government facilities, equipment 
or resources to assist any person seeking elected political office. 
 
(4) A staff of the Service who wishes to identify with a political party or 
seek political office shall resign from the Civil Service.  
 
(5) Where a staff  of  the Civil  Service is  in  doubt  as  to  whether  an 
organization or association is regarded as a political organization or 
association,  or  whether  any  action  which  he/she  wishes  to  take  is 
prohibited  by  the  Civil  Service Regulations,  he/she  shall  consult  the 
Head of the Civil Service. 
 
(6) Partisan  politics  shall  not  be  introduced  into or manifested  at  any 
Civil Service organization. 
 
(7) The Civil Service Council and the Head of the Civil Service shall take 
necessary steps to sanction staff of the Civil Service who violate the 
provisions in the Civil Service Regulations. 
 
110. Conflict of Interest 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall not  act in  a manner  or  assume  a 
position that places that officer in a conflict of interest situation. 
 
(a) A  conflict  of  interest  situation  occurs when the private  affairs  or 
financial interests of staff of the Civil Service conflict with or are likely 
to result in conflict with the duties or responsibilities of the staff of the 
Civil Service to the extent that:  
 

 
72 
 
(a) the ability  of  the  staff to  act  in the  public  interest  could  be 
impaired; or, 
(b) the actions of the staff could undermine or compromise: 
 
(i) the confidence of the public in the ability of the staff to 
discharge official responsibilities; or, 
(ii) the trust that the public places in the Civil Service.  
 
111. Declaration of Assets 
(1)  A  Ministry  or  Department  shall  ensure  that  Category  "A" staff  of  the 
Civil Service declare their assets as provided for in Article 286 (1) of 
the 1992 Constitution. 
 
(2)  Where  the  declaration  of  assets  is  made  by  electronic  means, 
copies of the receipt of the declaration from the Audit Service shall 
be submitted to the Chief Director or Head of Department. 
 
(3) The Office of the Head of Civil Service shall maintain a Register of all 
Declarants for the purpose of monitoring. 
 
112. Giving and Receiving of Presents and Gifts  
(1) A staff of the Civil Service shall not receive a present or a gift in the 
course of duty that is likely to influence his/her decision. 
 
(2) A staff of the Civil Service shall not receive a reward in cash or kind 
for  the performance  of  an  official  duty, except  with  the  express 
approval of the appointing authority. 
 

 
73 
 
(3) A staff of the Civil Service shall not give a gift as an inducement to 
a  public  officer  with  the  intention of influencing  that  public  officer 
in a manner that is of interest to the staff of the Service. 
 
(4) These instructions apply to all staff of the Civil Service, their families, 
friends   and   dependants   and   shall   be   held   responsible   for   its 
observance by any of these relations. 
 
113. Acting as Private Agents 
A staff of the Civil Service shall not act as a private agent to receive any 
payment from public funds for any member of the public. 
 
114. Press Broadcasts and Lectures 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall  not,  without the  prior  permission  of 
the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service,  act  as  the  editor  of  a  newspaper, 
magazine or periodical.  
 
(2) This  Instruction  does  not  affect a staff  of  the  Civil  Service who  is 
required as part of his/her official duties to edit a paper. 
 
(3) The  express  permission  of  the  Chief  Director,  exercised  through 
Heads  of  Department  in  respect  of staff  of  the Civil  Service below 
the rank of Head of Department, shall be obtained before a staff of 
the Civil Service can give a public lecture or a broadcast related to 
the Service. 
(4) Where a staff  of  the Civil  Service gives  a  public  lecture,  which 
relates  to  the  work  of the Ministry  or Department  in which  the staff 
works, or any other official business, the Chief Director of the Ministry 
concerned shall be consulted and his /her prior approval obtained. 

 
74 
 
(5) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall  not  communicate  either  directly or 
indirectly to the press or to any unauthorized person any information 
which he may have gained in the course of his official duty without 
appropriate authorization. 
 
115. Issuance of Press Releases   
Chief Directors and Heads of Department are encouraged to provide the 
Ministry responsible for Information with information for release to any press 
on  any  major  matters  which  are  considered  to  be of  public  interest, 
provided that the press statement has been cleared with the appropriate 
authority. 
 
116. Remunerative and Volunteer Activities 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service may provide consultancy services outside 
the  permanent  employment  of  that  officer, receive  remuneration 
from  public funds  for activities outside the position of the officer, or 
engage  in  volunteer  activities,  if  the  service,  business  or  activity 
does not: 
 
(a) interfere with the performance of the duty of the officer;  
(b) bring the Service into disrepute;  
(c) create a conflict of interest or the reasonable perception of a 
conflict of interest;  
(d) appear to represent Government opinion or policy;  
(e) involve  the  unauthorised  use  of  work  time  or  government 
premises, services, equipment, or supplies; or,  
(f) enable the officer to gain an advantage that is derived from 
the employment of the officer with the public service.  
 

 
75 
 
(2) The authority for granting permission to a staff of the Civil Service to 
engage in external remunerative or volunteer activities shall be the 
Bureaucratic Head, given in consultation with the Head of the Civil 
Service. 
(3) The  application  for  permission to  undertake  any  such  activity  shall 
be  forwarded  through  the  Head  of  Department  of  the staff and 
shall state: 
(a) the nature of the of the activity; 
(b) the employing agency; 
(c) terms of employment including fees; and, 
(d) the benefits likely to accrue to the Service and the State and 
any   such  details   as   may   be   required   by   the   approving 
authority. 
 
(4) In all cases, no remunerative or volunteer activity shall last for more 
than one (1) year in the first instance but the term may be renewed 
for  a  further  period  of  one (1)  year  after  which  the  officer  shall  be 
required to resign. 
 
117. Engaging in Gainful Occupation during Vacation Leave 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service may  not  engage  in  a  paid  employment 
outside his official duties or when on leave, except with notification 
to the Bureaucratic Head or other competent authority through the 
Head of Department. 
 
118. Private use of Government Time and Personnel 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service shall not employ for private purposes, the 
services of other Government Officers or employees during hours of 
duty,  or  make  use  of  materials,  stores  or  equipment  which  are  the 

 
76 
 
property of the State, except with the approval of the Head of the 
Ministry, Department, Region, or District.  
 
(2) Where  the  services  may  involve  the  use  of  Government property 
and Government employees, such services may be rendered within 
the  official  working  hours  for  the  convenience  of  members  of  the 
public,  including staff  of  the Civil  Service,  in return  for  a  fee  to  be 
paid into the Consolidated fund. 
 
119. Improper Influence 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service shall not directly or indirectly influence or 
attempt to influence a decision of: 
 
(a) the Civil Service Council; or, 
(b) the  Disciplinary  Committee  established  under Administrative 
Instructions 146.  
 
(2) Without  limiting  the effect of  sub-section (1), a staff  of  the  Civil 
Service may  give  a  certificate,  a  testimonial,  or  information  or 
assistance  to  an  applicant for  a  Civil  Service  post  or  may  supply 
information or give assistance on formal request by the Civil Service 
Council. 
 
120. Working Relationships 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service who  is  in  a  personal  relationship  with 
another staff in  the  same  workplace  shall  avoid  being  placed  in  a 
direct  reporting  relationship  to  the  other staff in  that  personal 
relationship   if   the   personal relationship   is   likely   to   compromise 
objectivity or to be perceived to compromise objectivity. 

 
77 
 
(2) A   staff   of   the   Civil   Service who   is   a   direct   relative   or   who 
permanently  resides  with  another staff  of  the  Service may  not be 
employed in situations, where: 
(a) a reporting relationship exists where one has  influence,  input, 
or   decision-making   power   over   the evaluation   of   the 
performance, salary, premiums, special permissions, 
conditions of work and similar matters; or,  
(b) the  working  relationship affords  an opportunity for  collusion 
between the two (2) staff of the Civil Service that would have 
a detrimental effect on the interest of the Service.  
 
121. Sexual Harassment     
(1) Sexual  harassment  is  defined  as  any  unwelcome  comment  or 
conduct of a  sexual nature  that  may detrimentally  affect  the  work 
environment  or  lead  to  adverse  job-related  consequences  for  the 
victim of the harassment.  
 
(2) Sexual harassment may include: 
 
(a) a  person  in  authority  asking  an employee  for  sexual 
favours in return for being hired or receiving promotions 
or other employment benefits; 
(b) sexual  advances  with  actual  or  implied  work-related 
consequences; 
(c) unwelcome  remarks,  questions,  jokes  or  innuendoes  of 
a  sexual  nature  including  sexist  comments  or  sexual 
invitations; 
(d) verbal abuse, intimidation or threats of a sexual nature; 
(e) leering, staring or making sexual gestures; 
(f) display of pornographic or other sexual materials; 

 
78 
 
(g) offensive pictures, graffiti, cartoons or sayings; 
(h) unwanted  physical contact  such  as  touching,  patting, 
pinching or hugging; and, 
(i) physical assault of a sexual nature.   
 
(3) The  complaint  procedure  for  sexual  harassment  may  be  either 
informal or formal. 
 
(4) The informal  complaint  procedure sexual  harassment  may  be  as 
follows: 
 
(a) a staff  of  the  Civil  Service who  has  a  complaint  of  sexual 
harassment may approach the immediate supervisor or Union 
representative to  discuss  potential  means  of  resolving  the 
complaint  and  to  request  assistance  in  resolving  the  matter; 
and 
(b) where   the   matter is   dealt   with   to   the   complainant’s 
satisfaction, the matter shall be considered resolved.  
 
(5) The  formal  complaint  procedure  is  applicable  where  a  complaint 
made  under  the  informal  complaint  procedure  is  not  resolved  to 
the complainant’s satisfaction, or where  the  complainant  chooses 
not to proceed informally.  
 
(6) Under the formal complaint procedure: 
 
(a) a  complainant  is  required to  lodge  a  complaint  in  writing, 
within  six  (6)  months,  of  the  alleged  occurrence  to  the  next 
level of Chief Director or Head of Department; 
(b) the  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department shall provide  a 
copy  of the  complaint  to  the  respondent,  investigate  the 

 
79 
 
allegation   and   take   steps   to   resolve   the   concern   as 
appropriate  within  thirty  (30)  days from  the  date  the  issue  is 
reported by the complainant; 
(c) both  the  complainant and  the  respondent  may  have  a 
representation present at the proceedings; 
(d) if  the  resolution proposed  as  a  result  of  the review  by  the 
Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department is  not  acceptable  to 
the  complainant,  the  complainant  may refer  the  matter,  in 
writing,  to  the Head of the  Civil  Service within thirty  (30) days 
after  receiving  the  written  response of  the  Chief  Director  or 
Head of Department, or after the response was due; 
(e) the  complainant  may  seek  assistance  through  the Union 
representative; 
(f) the Head  of the  Civil  Service shall  acknowledge,  in  writing, 
the  receipt  of  the  written  complaint,  provide  a  copy  of  the 
complaint    to    the    respondent,    and    have    the    matter 
investigated; 
(g) the complainant and Union representative, if applicable, shall 
be  advised  in  writing  of  the  decision  within  thirty  (30)  days 
from the  date  the Head  of the  Civil  Service receives the 
written complaint or at a mutually agreed date.  
 
122. False and Misleading Information 
A staff of the Civil Service commits an offence, if the officer knowingly, in  
respect of an application for employment, promotion, or any other  
matter, willfully gives false or misleading information to: 
 
(a) the Civil Service Council or to any Member thereof; 
(b) the Public Services Commission or any Appointing Authority;  
(c) or Disciplinary Authority; or, 

 
80 
 
(d) any  person  or  body  of persons  appointed  under  the  Civil 
Service  Regulations  or  by  any  competent  authority  to  assist 
the  Civil  Service  Council  or  any  appointing or  Disciplinary 
Authority in the exercise of its or his/her functions. 
 
123. Unauthorised Disclosure 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall  not,  without  the  prior  permission of 
the Bureaucratic  Head or  other  competent  authority,  publish  or 
disclose  to  any  other person,  otherwise  than  in  the  exercise  of 
his/her functions under the Regulations. 
 
(2) Official correspondence or records must not be shown or produced 
or  copies  communicated  to  a  private  person  without  the  express 
permission of the Chief Director or Head of Department or an officer 
to whom authority is delegated. 
 
(3) Where  in  the opinion  of a staff  of  the  Civil  Service,  the  contents  of 
any correspondence or record are prejudicial to the interest of the 
Service  and  the  people  of  Ghana,  the staff shall  bring this  to  the 
attention of the Chief Director or Head of Department.  
 
124. Working Hours 
(1) The hours of work in the Civil Service shall be a maximum of eight (8) 
hours  a  day or  forty  (40)  hours  a  week  except  in  cases  expressly 
provided for by law.  
 
(2) The hours of work attendance in the Civil Service are: 
           Monday to Friday              -     8.00 am --to – 12.30 pm 
- 1.30 pm – to – 5.00 pm 

 
81 
 
125. Flexible Hours of Work 
(1) A  Ministry  or  Department  may  adopt  flexible  hours  of  work outside 
the normal working hours in order to adjust the working hours, days 
or weeks for employees who may be eligible by  the nature of their 
work. 
 
(2) Staff  of  the  Civil  Service  may  choose  to shift  their  week  day 
schedule by: 
 
(a) starting the day later earlier and closing earlier; or, 
(b) starting the day later and closing later. 
 
(3) Irrespective of the option that an employee choses, the core hours 
established  by  law  during  which  an  employee  is  obliged to  be 
present at the work place shall be the same. 
 
(4) In  determining  an  officer’s  eligibility   for   flexible   hours   of   work 
arrangement, Chief   Directors   and   Heads   of Department   may 
consider the following: 
 
(a) Nature of the officer’s job – employees whose jobs require 
attendance at specific hours in a day of the week, may not 
be eligible for flexible hours of work; 
(b) Needs of the officer’s Team or Department – Departments 
that require employees to be present due to the number of 
incoming document; 
(c) Impact on colleagues -  situations where the department’s 
operations are largely dependent on teamwork, the 
employee is less likely to freely modify his working schedules; 
(d) Impact on Clients – the flexible hours of work arrangemen 
should not have negative impat on service delivery; and, 
(e) Duration of the Arrangement – employees may have flexible 
hours for a specific period but may have to follow standard 
schedule at other times when it becomes necessary.  

 
82 
 
(5) Flexible hours of work shall be approved by the Chief Director or the 
Head of Department in writing.  
 
126. Attendance Register 
(1) A Ministry  and  Department  shall  keep  an  Attendance  Register 
designed to suit the needs and special conditions of the office.  
 
(2) A staff of the Civil Service is required to make the necessary entries 
in the Attendance Register daily. 
 
(3) The  entries  in  the  Attendance  Register  shall  be  collated for  the 
management    of    work    attendance    in    the    Ministries    and 
Departments.  
 
127. Permission for Absence from Duty 
A staff of the Civil Service may not leave office during office hours without 
the permission of the immediate supervisor. An officer leaving office must 
inform  a  responsible  officer  where  he  can  be located  for  his recall  in  an 
emergency. 
 
128. Permission to Leave Ghana 
A staff  of  the  Civil  Service may not travel  out  of  the  country  without 
permission from the Head of the Civil Service or the Bureaucratic Head. 

 
83 
 
CHAPTER 5: LABOUR RELATIONS AND DISCIPLINE 
 
129. Labour relations and discipline are mechanisms by which management 
and staff of the Civil Service interact in the course of the performance 
of their duties to achieve collective and individual goals and 
objectives based on the principles of administrative justice.  
 
(1) The  objectives  of  labour  relations  and  discipline  in  the  Civil  Service 
are to: 
 
(a) secure mutual relationship and respect between 
Management and staff; 
(b) minimise disputes   and   create   a   harmonised   relationship 
among staff; 
(c) establish  and  maintain equity in  the  Service  and ensure  that 
staff share  in  the  gains  and  personal  development  of  one 
another; 
(d) provide  and  promote  opportunities  for staff to  have  a  say  in 
the management and decision-making within the Service; 
(e) secure   the   highest   level   of mutual   understanding   and 
goodwill among staff; 
(f) create a conducive environment for increased performance 
and satisfactory service delivery; 
(g) ensure that staff conduct themselves in accordance with the 
code of conduct and ethics of the Service; 
(h) inform staff  of  the Civil  Service of applicable  rules  governing 
the management of grievances in the Service; and, 
(i) provide  an  avenue  for  the  redress  of  grievances  of staff to 
engender trust in the Service. 

 
84 
 
(2) To   attain   the   above   objectives,   the   Civil   Service   shall   make 
adequate information available to staff with a view to promoting a 
better understanding of the goals and policies of the Civil Service. 
 
(3)   A staff   of   the Civil   Service shall   not   solicit   the   assistance   or 
intervention of  members  of  the  Civil  Service  Council,  members of 
any  committee  of  the  Civil  Service,  Management  or  of  persons 
outside the Civil Service to unduly influence matters connected with 
discipline  or  conditions  of  service  or  with  a  view  to  obtaining 
considerations   for   appointment, transfer   or   promotion,   among 
others. 
 
130. Grievance 
A grievance may arise from administrative acts of commission or omission 
or disciplinary action which result in a staff of the Civil Service complaining 
that  s/he  has  been  denied  a  right  to  which  s/he  considers  justifiably 
entitled, or that s/he has not been fairly treated. 
 
131. Grievance Policy 
(1) A staff of the Civil  Service may  raise  a  grievance  against  another 
officer or the Service. 
 
(2) Staff  of  the Civil Service shall  be  given  a  fair hearing  by  their 
immediate supervisor concerning any grievances they wish to raise. 
 
(3) Staff  of  the  Civil  Service  may appeal  to  the  Chief  Director  or Head 
of   Department   against   a   decision   made   by   their   immediate 
supervisor. 

 
85 
 
(4) Staff   of   the   Civil   Service   may be   accompanied   by   a   fellow 
employee  of their choice,  when  raising  a  grievance  or  appealing 
against a decision. 
 
132. Grievance Procedure  
(1) The  grievance  procedure  in the  Civil  Service  is  the  internal  dispute 
resolution  mechanism  by  which  a staff  of  the Service may  have 
his/her  grievance  addressed.  It is  a  step  by  step  approach  to 
getting a complaint or dispute addressed satisfactorily.  
 
(2) The  aim  of  the  procedure  is  to  settle  the  grievance  as  nearly  as 
possible to its point of origin. 
 
(3) The recommended stages in raising a grievance in the Civil Service 
include: 
 
a) aggrieved officer shall, as a first step, take the matter up with 
his/her immediate supervisor; and, 
b) if  the  matter  remains  unresolved,  the  aggrieved officer shall 
take  the  matter  up  in  writing  with  the  next  level of  the 
authority, as prescribed below, until the matter is resolved: 
i) Chief Director; 
ii) Head of the Civil Service; and, 
iii) Civil Service Council. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
86 
 
133. Disciplinary Matters 
(1) Staff  of  the Civil  Service shall  be  responsible  for  their  personal 
actions  and  conduct, and  shall observe  the  Civil  Service  Code  of 
Conduct, rules and regulations, comply with the administrative and 
other  official  instructions  and  act  in  the  general  interest  of  the 
Service in the performance of their duties. 
 
(2) Every supervisor  is  responsible  for  maintaining  order  and  discipline 
among staff of the Service under the supervision of that supervisor.  
 
(3) The supervisor is responsible for ensuring that: 
 
(a) the officers know,  understand  and  comply  with  official  rules, 
instructions and procedures; 
(b) the instructions of the supervisor are carried out; and, 
(c) any   violations   are   dealt   with in   accordance   with   the 
established disciplinary procedures in the Service. 
 
134. Disciplinary Authority for Civil Service Staff  
(1) The  President,  on  the  advice  of  the Civil  Service  Council,  shall  be 
the Disciplinary Authority for all staff of the Civil Service. 
 
(2) The   Disciplinary   Authority   may   be   exercised on   behalf   of   the 
President of the Republic as follows: 
(a) Chief   Directors,   Directors   and   Analogous   Grades - Civil 
Service Council; and, 
(b) Deputy  Directors,  Analogous  Grades  and  below – the  Civil 
Service  Council  on  the  advice  of  the  Head  of  the  Civil 
Service. 
 

 
87 
 
135. Misconduct  
(1) An act by a staff of the Civil Service constitutes misconducts, if that 
act:  
 
(a) amounts to a failure to perform in a proper manner, any duty 
imposed on that officer; 
(b) contravenes the Civil  Service  Code  of  Conduct,  rules  and 
regulations, administrative and other official instructions of the 
Service; 
(c) is  detrimental to the efficient conduct of the functions  of the 
Civil Service; or, 
(d) tends to bring the Civil Service into disrepute. 
 
(2) A conviction of a staff of the Civil Service by a competent court of 
jurisdiction for any offence involving fraud, criminal negligence and 
dishonesty  shall  be  considered  as  bringing  the Civil  Service  into 
disrepute. 
 
136. Types of Misconduct 
The underlisted acts of commission or omission constitute misconduct by a 
staff of the Civil Service: 
 
(a) reporting  late  for  duty,  or  closing  earlier  than  the official  closing 
time;  
(b) absence from duty without leave or reasonable excuse; 
(c) insubordination    including    disobeying,    disregarding    or    willfully 
defaulting   in   carrying   out any   lawful   or   reasonable   order   or 
instruction  given  by  any  person,  committee  or  board having the 
authority to  give  the  order  or  instruction  and  any  other  similar 
action; 
(d) rudeness; 

 
88 
 
(e) drinking  alcoholic  beverage or  getting  intoxicated  during  office 
hours; 
(f)  using, for some purpose not connected with the officer’s duties and 
without  the  consent  of  the  prescribed  authority,  any  property  or 
facility provided by the Service; 
(g) engagement  in  any  gainful  occupation  outside the  Civil  Service 
which  conflicts  with  the  mandate  or  functions  of  the  Civil  Service 
without the consent of the prescribed authority or taking up, without 
the  written  approval  of  the Head  of  the  Civil  Service,  any  other 
employment during official working hours; 
(h) engagement in any activity outside the officer’s duties which is likely 
to lead to the officer taking improper advantage of his/her office; 
(i)        failure  to  submit  reports,  information,  or  both  as  prescribed  by  the 
Service; 
(j)   unauthorised    disclosure    of    classified    or    unclassified    official 
information,  document,  to  a  private  person,  or  to  an  unauthorised 
staff of the Civil Service; 
(k) failure to adhere to the oath of secrecy regarding the affairs of the 
Civil Service; 
(l)        receiving,  in  the officer’s  personal  capacity,  any  payments  on 
behalf of the Civil Service; 
(m) acting  as  an  agent  of  the  Civil  Service  without  the  appropriate   
written approval; 
(n) receiving   or   soliciting   any   contribution,   fee, gift   of   value   or 
emolument of any kind from any person for services rendered in the 
discharge of the officer’s duties; 
(o) receiving   gifts   of  value   in   contravention   of   prevailing   national 
policy; 
(p) misappropriation of funds; 

 
89 
 
(q) malingering, or dereliction of duty; 
(r) forgery, or fraudulent misrepresentation;  
(s) coercion,  intimidation,  or  threatening  of  a  fellow officer,  or  use of 
insulting language towards another officer;   
(t) spreading  of  malicious  and  false  information about  a staff  of  the 
Service or the Civil Service;  
(u) failure to comply with laid down safety regulations;  
(v) habitual lateness to work; and, 
(w) borrowing  money  from  or in  any  way  placing  one’s  self  under 
pecuniary  obligation  to  a  firm  or  person  having  business dealings 
with the Civil Service. 
 
137. Sanctions and Penalties     
(1) The Disciplinary Authority may impose any of the following sanctions 
or penalties on a staff of the Civil Service for misconduct: 
 
(a) dismissal — the  termination  of  appointment  with  forfeiture  of 
retirement  benefits, excluding  statutory retirement  benefits,  if 
any; 
(b) termination  or  removal — the  termination  of  appointment, 
with  or  without  a  reduction  in  retirement  benefits,  where 
applicable; 
(c) reduction in grade or demotion — removal from  the officer’s 
current grade to a lower grade, with an immediate reduction 
of salary and other benefits; 
(d) surcharge — requesting   the officer to   make   good   any 
consequential   loss   to   the   Service   as   a   result   of   the 
misconduct; 
(e) reduction in salary — an immediate adjustment of salary to a 
lower step in the salary level attached to the officer’s grade; 

 
90 
 
(f) deferment of increment — the postponement of the date on 
which   the   next   increment is   due,   with   corresponding 
postponements in subsequent years; 
(g) stoppage   of   increment — non-payment   for   a   specified 
period of an increment otherwise due; 
(h) suspension  from  duty  for  a  minimum  period  of  two  weeks (2) 
and  maximum  of  three  months  (3)  with  loss  of pay  and 
allowances; and, 
(i)  reprimand  or  warning — official  rebuke  of an  officer in 
writing. 
 
(2) Dismissal,   removal or termination and   reduction   in   rank   are   major 
penalties and all other penalties are minor penalties. 
 
(3) The Sixth  Schedule  of the  Civil  Service Regulations, 202...   may  apply  as 
circumstances require, subject to appropriate procedures. 
 
(4) All  disciplinary  actions  taken  against  a staff  of  the Civil  Service shall  be 
reviewed  after  six  (6)  months except  for  the  major  penalties  of  dismissal 
and removal. 
 
138. Petition 
(1)  Petition includes any appeal against a decision of a staff of the Civil 
Service having authority to make decision affecting another officer 
in the Civil Service. 
 
(2) Petitions  must bear the signature and the address of the petitioner. 
When it has been written by a person other than the petitioner, the 
signature and address of the writer must be included. 

 
91 
 
(3)  Petitions   submitted   on   behalf   of   other   persons   will   not   be 
entertained  unless the  author  can  produce  an  authority  note  to 
show that he had been so authorized. 
 
(4) A petition may be returned to the petitioner, by the officer to whom 
it is first submitted, if it:  
 
(a)  does   not   comply   with   the   Administrative   Instructions   on 
petitions; 
(b)  deals  with  cases  in  which  legal  proceedings  are  pending; 
and, 
(c)  is  illegible,  unintelligible,  or  worded  in  abusive or  improper 
language. 
 
139. Submission of Petitions 
(1) A  petition must  be  submitted  through  the  petitioner’s  immediate 
supervisor. 
 
(2) Petitions submitted otherwise than in Sub-section (1) will be returned 
to the petitioner.  
 
(3) Copies of  petitions sent  directly to  the  appointing  authority,  will  be 
treated as having been sent for information only.  
 
(4)  Where  a  petitioner is  a  former  staff of the  Civil  Service  and the 
substance  of  his  petition  refers  to  the  Service,  it  is  in  the  interest  of 
the petitioner to comply with the rules applicable to serving officers. 
        
 
 

 
92 
 
(5)  Petitions should be addressed as follows: 
 
(a) a staff   of   the   Civil   Service   who   is   aggrieved   on an 
administrative matter may petition the Chief Director or Head 
of Department. If the petitioner is dissatisfied with the decision 
of Chief Director or Head of Department, he may petition the 
Head of the Civil Service; and, 
(b) a petition against the decision of the Head of the Civil Service 
or a Minister shall be heard by the Civil Service Council. 
 
(6)  Petitions  which are  addressed  otherwise  than  in  accordance  with 
Section 138 will  be  promptly  returned  to  the petitioner  with  an 
indication as to the correct authority to be addressed. 
 
(7) Where   the   petition   is   an   appeal   against   an   order   made   in 
disciplinary  proceedings  by a Chief  Director,  Head  of  Department 
or   other   officers   exercising   powers   of   disciplinary   control,   the 
petition must be submitted within ten (10) days from the date of the 
decision. 
 
(8) In other cases, petitions will not be entertained if: 
  (a)  the petitioner has unreasonably delayed its submission; or  
(b) a  previous  petition  to  the  same  authority  has  been  rejected, 
unless the  second  petition  is  submitted within one  (1) year  of 
that   decision, shows   new   and   material   facts,   and   gives 
adequate reasons for their absence from the first petition. 
 
 
 
 

 
93 
 
(9) In the case of complaints and grievances from the public: 
 
(a) they shall be directed to the Client Services Units of Ministries 
and Departments; and 
(b) they   shall   pass   through   the   approved   communication 
channel  of  the Ministry  or  Department,  where  they  are  in 
writing. 
 
(10) In  instances  where  petitions  made  to  the  Ministries  or  Departments 
are  not  satisfactorily addressed, the  petitioner  may  resort  to  other 
alternative dispute resolution mechanism. 
 
140. Acknowledgement of Petitions 
Petitions  must  be  promptly  acknowledged  by the  officers  to  whom  they 
are addressed. 
 
141. Handling of Petitions 
(1) A petition must be forwarded promptly, with a report indicating:  
 
(a) the material allegations made in the petition, and the redress 
asked for; 
(b) the  actual  facts  or  the  case  as  ascertained  by  the  reporting 
officer; and, 
(c) reference  to  any  previous  and connected  petition  of  which 
the reporting officer has knowledge. 
 
(2) The  reporting  officer  will  add  such  remarks  on  the  subject  as he 
thinks  proper  to  make, and  will  conclude  with  a  recommendation 
about  the  response which  he  considers  should  be  given  to  the 
petitioner. 
 

 
94 
 
142. Frivolous Petitions 
In  the  event  of  a petition  being  adjudged  frivolous,  unmeritorious, or 
without  adequate  ground,  the  petitioner  may  be  informed  officially  and 
the fact may be placed on the appropriate file. 
 
143. Procedure for Making Petitions and Appeals 
A staff  of  the Civil  Service,  who  is  dissatisfied  with a decision,  sanction  or 
penalty imposed on him or her, may submit within ten (10) working days, a 
written petition to the Disciplinary Authority which imposed the sanction or 
penalty for a review of the decision. 
 
(1) A staff  of  the Civil  Service who  intends  to  appeal  a  decision  shall, 
within ten (10) working days of the decision, give notice in writing to 
the  appropriate  Disciplinary  Authority  of  his or her  intention  to 
appeal. 
 
(2) A staff  of  the Civil  Service who  wishes  to  appeal  may  be  given  a 
copy of the report of the disciplinary proceedings  including, where 
reasonable,  copies  of  documents  tendered  in  evidence  or  the 
relevant parts. 
 
(3) An appeal submitted within one (1) year of the date of the decision 
after an earlier appeal may be admitted if the authority considering 
that  second  appeal is  satisfied  that  there  appears  in  that second 
appeal,  new  and  material  facts  which may  affect  the  earlier 
decision and adequate reasons for the non-disclosure of those facts 
at an earlier date have been given. 
 

 
95 
 
(4) The second appeal from an aggrieved officer shall be addressed to 
the next level of Disciplinary Authority. 
 
(5) If  the  aggrieved officer is not  satisfied  with  the  outcome  of  the 
appeal  to  the  next  higher  level specified  above,  the  officer may 
appeal  to  the  Civil  Service  Council  through  the Head  of  the Civil 
Service. 
 
(6) A  decision  taken  on  a  petition  shall  be  communicated  to  the 
petitioner  not later  than five  (5) working  days from  the  date  of  the 
decision. 
 
(7) An   appeal shall   not be   made against   a   decision   taken,   or 
confirmed  by,  the  President  of the  Republic of  Ghana  unless  the 
complainant  considers it  necessary  to  seek  redress  in a court  of 
competent jurisdiction.  
 
144. Stay of Execution on Appeal 
The  enforcement  of  a decision, against  which  a  notice  of  appeal  has 
been made,  shall  be  suspended  until  after the determination  of  the 
appeal. 
 
145. Records of Decision on Petition 
A register shall be kept by the Ministry and Department, Head of the Civil 
Service  or  Civil  Service  Council  of  all  decisions  made  on  petitions  or 
appeals. 
 
 
  

 
96 
 
146. The Disciplinary Committee 
(1) A disciplinary Committee shall be constituted only when a matter of 
an alleged misconduct is reported. 
 
(2) The composition of a Disciplinary Committee shall be as follows: 
 
(a)  a  senior  officer  nominated  by  the  Disciplinary  Authority,  as 
Chairman. 
(b)  the Head  of  Human  Resources  or  his  or  her  representative; 
and, 
 (c)  one (1) representative of the Local Workers Association. 
 
(3) The Head  of Human Resource or an officer acting in that capacity 
shall act as the investigating officer. 
 
(4)  A staff   of   the Civil   Service appearing   before   a   Disciplinary 
Committee  shall  be  given every  opportunity  to  defend  him/herself 
and  have  a  right  to  appeal within ten  (10) working  days after the 
decision. 
 
(5) A staff   of   the Civil   Service appearing   before   a Disciplinary 
Committee  may  have  legal  representation  and  a  right  to  call 
witnesses.  
 
(6)  Where   the   officer   is   represented   by   Counsel   the   disciplinary 
authority   may   request   for   representation   from   the   Attorney-
General’s Office. 
 
(7) The findings  and  recommendations  of  the Committee shall  be 
forwarded to the Disciplinary Authority for a decision. 

 
97 
 
147. Disciplinary Procedure  
(1) All  acts  of  misconduct  by Civil  Service  staff shall  be  dealt  with  as 
soon as possible after their occurrence.  
 
(2) Where the work  or  conduct of  an  officer amounts  to  a  breach  of 
discipline but does not warrant a penalty, a warning shall be given 
to the officer. 
 
(3) The warning, when written (i.e. formal) shall specify: 
 
(a) the nature of the offence; 
(b) the improvements required within a specified period; and, 
(c) the  disciplinary  action  that  may  be  taken  if  the  offence  is 
repeated, or if the improvement required is not made. 
 
(4) Copies of the warning letter shall be placed on the personal file of 
the Civil Service staff and a copy forwarded to the Chief Director or 
his Head of Class. 
 
148. Further Disciplinary Proceedings  
(1) The    Disciplinary    Authority    may    institute    further disciplinary 
proceedings  against  a staff  of  the Service,  if  the  Authority  has 
reason to believe that: 
   (a) a serious offence has been committed; or, 
(b) where,  despite  previous  warnings,  an  officer’s  behaviour  or  
performance has still not reached an acceptable standard. 
 
 
 

 
98 
 
(2) Further disciplinary proceedings instituted under Sub-section (1) may 
take the form of: 
(a) Formal Proceedings; and, 
(b) Summary Proceedings. 
  
149. Formal Proceedings 
The Disciplinary Authority shall institute the Formal Proceedings as follows: 
 
(a) the Disciplinary Authority shall institute preliminary investigations into 
a case of alleged misconduct that is brought to the attention of the 
Authority; 
(b) if  the  conclusions  of the  preliminary  investigations establish  possible 
wrong-doing, the Disciplinary Authority shall prefer a charge against 
the  accused  officer  in  writing  and  where  necessary,  the  Office  of 
the Attorney-General may be consulted with regard to the terms of 
the charge; 
(c) where the Disciplinary Authority considers it necessary, the accused 
officer  shall  be  interdicted  before  the  commencement  or  in  the 
course of the inquiry; 
(d) the  accused  officer  shall  be  served with  a  copy  of  the  charge, 
together with a brief statement of the basis of the allegations; 
(e) the  accused  officer  shall  be  informed  in  writing  of  the  date,  time 
and  venue  of  the  inquiry,  and  of  the  right  of the officer  to  counsel 
and to call any number of witnesses during the inquiry; 
(f) the  accused officer  shall  respond  in  writing  within  a  period  of  ten 
(10) working days, stating the grounds upon which the officer wishes 
to rely upon to be exonerated from the charges; 
(g) if  the  accused  officer  does  not  respond  by the  specified  date 
without  reasonable  cause,  it  may  be  construed  to  mean  that  the 
officer does not wish to make any statement; 

 
99 
 
(h) the  Disciplinary  Authority  shall,  if  not  satisfied  with  the  accused 
officer’s response, refer the matter to the Disciplinary Committee to 
inquire into the matter and report; 
(i) as far as practicable, the proceedings shall not last more than three 
(3) months; 
(j) where  the evidence  may  involve  professional  or  technical  matters, 
the  Committee may  be  assisted, on  request or  by  direction of  the 
Disciplinary Authority, by not more than two (2) experts; 
(k) the  Disciplinary  Committee shall  determine  the  date,  time  and 
venue  for  the hearings  and  invite  the  accused  officer  in  writing, 
accordingly; 
(l) before  the  inquiry  is  held,  the  Disciplinary  Committee shall  call  on 
the accused officer to provide a list of witnesses the accused officer 
wishes to call to give evidence, and also provide a brief statement 
of  what  each  witness  is  expected  to  give  or  the  exhibits to  be 
tendered; 
(m) documentary evidence shall not be used at, or for the purposes of, 
a disciplinary  inquiry  unless  the  accused  officer has  been  served 
with a copy of the document before the inquiry; 
(n) if the Disciplinary Committee is satisfied that the evidence or exhibit 
is  material  to  the  charge  in  question,  the  Disciplinary  Committee 
shall make   appropriate   arrangements   for   those   persons to   be 
called to attend the inquiry; 
(o) the  Disciplinary  Committee  shall  exercise  discretion  to  permit  the 
accused  officer to be  present  at  the  inquiry  and  if  the  accused 
officer   is   absent   without   reasonable   cause,   the   Disciplinary 
Committee may proceed without the accused officer; 
(p) where  after  the  commencement  of  the  inquiry,  further  documents 
are   introduced   in   evidence,   the Disciplinary   Committee   shall 

 
100 
 
adjourn   the   inquiry   to allow   the   accused   officer   adequate 
opportunity to examine the documents; 
(q) the  accused  officer  shall  be  allowed  to  cross-examine  witnesses 
and to call witnesses; 
(r) a full record of the evidence shall be kept in writing; 
(s) if   during   the   course   of   the   inquiry   the Disciplinary   Committee 
considers that an additional charge or charges should be preferred, 
the  Disciplinary  Authority  shall  inform  the Disciplinary  Committee 
who  shall  adopt  the  same  procedure  as  adopted in  preferring  the 
original charge or charges; 
(t) on   completion  of  the   inquiry,   the   Disciplinary   Committee   shall 
submit  to  the  Disciplinary  Authority  a  report  of  their  findings  and 
recommendations  which  shall  include  the  record  of  proceedings 
and any document or material tendered in as evidence; 
(u) if the Disciplinary Authority is satisfied that the charge or charges are 
established,  the  Disciplinary  Authority  shall  consider  the  sanction  or 
penalty, if any, to be imposed; 
(v) the  accused  officer  shall  be  informed  in  writing  as  to  whether  the 
charge or charges are established and the sanctions that are to be 
applied; 
(w) if  criminal  proceedings  are  instituted  against  a Civil  Service  staff in 
any  court of competent  jurisdiction,  disciplinary  proceedings  upon 
any  grounds  involved in  the  criminal  charge  shall  be  suspended 
until the    conclusion    of    the    criminal    proceedings    and    the 
determination by any appeal; and, 
(x) disciplinary proceedings may, however, be instituted before, during 
or after trial, if the criminal offence also amounts to an infringement 
of the rules or regulations of the Civil Service. 
 

 
101 
 
150. Summary Proceedings 
(1) Summary  proceedings  shall  be  adopted  when cases  are  to  be 
adjudged promptly, without any elaborate format.  
 
(2) Summary proceedings shall be conducted as follows: 
(a) the Disciplinary   Authority   either   investigates the alleged 
misconduct or causes an investigation to be conducted by a 
committee  of  at  least  three  (3)  Public  Servants  of  grades 
higher   than that   of   the   accused   officer,   including   a 
representative of the local union; 
(b) the  Disciplinary  Authority  may invite  a person  with  requisite 
expertise to serve on the Committee; 
(c) as  far  as  practicable,  the  proceedings  shall  be  conducted 
within one (1) month; 
(d) the  Disciplinary  Authority  shall  communicate  details  of  the 
charges or  allegations  of  misconduct  to  the  accused  officer 
in writing; 
(e) the  accused  officer  shall  respond  to  the  charge  or  charges 
within one (1) week; 
(f) the Disciplinary Authority shall study the response and decide 
on the next line of action; 
(g) where  the  response  from  the  accused  officer  is  considered 
unsatisfactory,  the  Disciplinary  Authority  shall communicate 
the   sanction   or   penalty   to   the   accused   officer,   stating 
reasons for the decision; and, 
(h) a record of the investigation shall be kept showing: 
(i) the charge or charges, 
(ii) a brief summary of the facts of the case,  
(iii) the findings of the investigations; 

 
102 
 
(iv) the  decision  of  the  Disciplinary  Authority  as  to  whether 
or not the charge or charges had been proven; and, 
(v) the penalty imposed, if any. 
 
(3) A major penalty shall not be imposed in summary proceedings.   
 
151. Interdiction 
(1) Interdiction   may   be   ordered   where   the   Disciplinary   Authority 
considers  that  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  Civil  Service  that  accused Civil 
Service  staff should  temporarily  cease  forthwith  to  exercise  the  powers 
and functions of the officer’s office.   
 
Interdiction may, therefore, be ordered if: 
(a) proceedings  which  may  result  in  a  major  penalty  are about  to  be 
taken; 
(b) the    Disciplinary    Authority    considers    that    further    disciplinary 
proceedings are justified against the Civil Service staff; 
(c) the Civil  Service  staff is  the  subject  of  criminal  investigation  into  an 
alleged  offence,  whether  or  not  the  offence  is  connected  with  his 
normal work as a Civil Service staff; 
(d) the Civil Service staff is charged with committing a criminal offence 
or there are grounds for criminal proceedings; and, 
(e) the continued  presence of  a staff  of  the Civil  Service in office may 
influence investigations into an alleged offence. 
 
(2) In  emergency  cases,  where  interdiction  is  called  for  urgently  but 
Interdiction shall normally not exceed the period of six (6) months. 
 
 
 

 
103 
 
152. Interdiction in Emergency Situation 
(1) In  emergency  cases,  where  interdiction  is  called  for urgently  but 
more  than  forty-eight  (48)  hours  is  likely  to  elapse  before  the 
decision of the appropriate Disciplinary Authority can be obtained, 
the  Chief  Director  or  the  Head  of  Department  may  order  the Civil 
Service   staff to   temporarily   cease   to   exercise his   powers   and 
functions. 
 
(2) A  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department,  who  interdicts  under 
Section  127  (1)  shall  immediately  report  his  action  and  reasons 
therefore to the Head of the Civil Service. 
 
(3) The Disciplinary Authority shall examine the report and if it considers 
that  the Civil  Service  staff should  be  interdicted,  the  Disciplinary 
Authority  shall  exercise  its  power  to  interdict  and inform the Civil 
Service staff, accordingly. 
 
(4) If  the  Disciplinary Authority  decides  not  to  exercise  its  power to 
interdict  it  shall  inform  the  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department, 
who  gave  the  order,  and  the Civil  Service  staff to  whom  the  order 
was given that the order is accordingly cancelled. 
 
153. Remuneration on Interdiction     
(1) A Civil  Service  staff who  is interdicted  shall  be  paid  fifty  percent 
(50%) of his monthly salary.  
 
(2) If  the  disciplinary  proceedings  do  not  result in  the  dismissal  of the 
Civil Service staff, the whole of the salary withheld shall be restored 
when the final decision is made. 

 
104 
 
154. Summary Action Arising from Interdiction 
(1) Where interdiction is the result of a criminal investigation leading to 
prosecution,  and  the Civil  Service  staff is  convicted  of  a  criminal 
offence  involving  fraud  or  theft,  he  shall  summarily  be  dismissed 
from the Service and forfeit the salary withheld. 
 
(2) A Civil  Service  staff interdicted  from  duty  shall  not  leave  Ghana 
without the permission of the Disciplinary Authority. 
 
155. Reporting Disciplinary Actions 
The  Chief  Director  of  a  Ministry  shall  submit  a  report  of  all disciplinary 
awards to the Head of the Civil Service after disciplinary action has been 
taken. 
 
156. Reporting for Criminal Prosecution 
(1) Where the report of a Disciplinary Committee on an investigation or 
any  inquiry  discloses  that  there  are  enough  grounds for  criminal 
prosecution of  a  Civil  Service  staff,  the  Disciplinary  Authority  shall 
submit  a  report  to  the  Attorney-General  for  advice,  unless  action 
has been taken, or is about to be taken by the Police. 
 
(2) If the Attorney-General does not advise prosecution, the Disciplinary 
Authority, may consider taking formal disciplinary proceedings 
against the Civil Service staff. 
 
157. No Disciplinary Action Where Criminal Proceedings are Pending 
If  criminal  proceedings  are  pending  against  a  Civil  Service  staff in  any 
court,  disciplinary  proceedings  shall  not  be  conducted  on  the  same 

 
105 
 
grounds  as  in  the  criminal  charge  until  the  final  determination  of  the 
criminal proceedings. 
 
158. Disciplinary Action on Acquittal of Criminal Charges 
(1) A Civil Service staff acquitted of a criminal charge in any court shall 
not be dismissed or otherwise punished on any charge upon which 
he has been acquitted. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding  sub-regulation  (1),  the Civil  Service  staff may  be 
dismissed or otherwise punished on any other charges arising out of 
a charge  on  the Civil  Service  staff’s conduct in the matter, unless 
the  charge  is  substantially  different  from  the  one  upon which  the 
Civil Service staff had been acquitted.  
 
(3) Where  it  is  proposed  to  commence  proceedings  on  a  matter  that 
the Civil  Service staff has  been  acquitted,  the  record  of  acquittal 
and  the  draft  disciplinary  charges  shall  be  sent  to  the  Attorney-
General  for  advice  as to whether  or  not  the  charge  can  be 
sustained. 
 
159. Dismissal on Conviction 
Where  a Civil  Service  staff is  convicted  of  an offence  involving  fraud or 
theft or sentenced to imprisonment, the Appointing Authority shall dismiss 
him forthwith and the dismissal shall take effect from the date of judgment 
by the Court. 
  
160. Procedure for Reporting after Court Order 
(1) Where  a Civil Service  staff is  convicted  of  a criminal charge  by  a 
court,  the  Attorney-General,  upon  being  informed  by  the  Registrar 

 
106 
 
of the  Court shall, report  the  fact  to  the  sector Minister  and  shall 
forward to him a copy of the charges and the judgment, or on the 
request of the Minister, a copy of the entire proceedings. 
(2) If an appeal against conviction is entered by a Civil Service staff, a 
report  shall  be made  immediately  to  the  sector  Minister  by  the 
Attorney-General.  The result of the appeal shall be reported to the 
sector Minister immediately by the Attorney-General. 
 
(3) If  the  Disciplinary  Authority  considers  that  the  degree of  disrepute 
brought upon the Civil Service by the conviction of the Civil Service 
staff is such as to warrant the institution of disciplinary proceedings, 
it  shall,  unless  an  appeal  against  the  conviction  is  pending,  to 
request    the  Civil  Service  staff,  in  writing,  to  show cause  within ten 
(10)  working  days  why  he  should  not  be  dismissed,  or  otherwise 
punished for having brought the Service into disrepute. 
 
(4) If the accused Civil Service staff does not reply by ten (10) working 
days,   the   Disciplinary   Authority   may   assume that   he has   no 
representation to  make  and,  therefore,  proceed  to  impose  the 
appropriate penalty. 
 
(5) On  receipt  of  the reply  of  the  accused  Civil  Service  staff,  the 
Disciplinary  Authority  shall  consider  the  representation  made  in  the 
reply and take a decision on whether or not to impose a penalty. 
  
161. Cases not Covered by Law or Regulations  
Any  case  not  expressly  covered by  the  Civil  Service Law,  1993  (PNDCL 
327)  or  the  Regulations  shall  be  reported  to  the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service 

 
107 
 
who, in consultation with the Civil Service Council, may issue instructions as 
to how such cases should be dealt with.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
108 
 
CHAPTER 6: OFFICE ADMINISTRATION 
PART I 
OFFICE INFORMATION PROCESSES 
 
162. Official Communication 
(1)  The English Language    shall    be    the    medium   of all   official 
communications. 
 
(2) The principal means by  which official information is communicated 
are:  
 
 (a) oral communication; 
(b) written communication; 
 (b) electronic communication; 
 (c) telephony; 
 (d) manuals and publications; 
 (e) press and electronic media; 
 (f) meetings, staff durbars, workshops and seminars; and, 
 (g) rules, regulations, guidelines and administrative instructions. 
 
163. Quality of Information 
All information that has to be communicated, whether oral or written shall 
be expressed in concise, explicit and polite form. Simple language, as far 
as  possible should  be  used  for  correspondence  by  staff of  the  Civil 
Service. 
 
164. Types of Office Communication 
Official     communication shall     include     letters,     minutes,     circulars, 
memoranda  and  reports  that are  exchanged with  the  general  public  as 
well as within and between Ministries and Departments. 

 
109 
 
165. Rules Governing the Preparation of Official Communication 
The following rules shall be observed in official communication: 
(a)  no   correspondence   shall   be   initiated   unless   it   is absolutely 
necessary to do so; 
(b) the strictest economy consistent with efficiency shall be exercised in 
the preparation of correspondence; 
(c) extra  copies  of  any  correspondence  shall  be  restricted  to  actual 
needs; 
(d) plain books  of  obsolete  records and  spoilage from  typing  and 
duplicating  shall be  used  as  drafting  provided  such  condemned 
documents do not contain confidential information; 
(e) where  appropriate,  each  item  of  correspondence  shall  bear  a 
reference  number  as  well as a  date.  Generally,  letters exchanged 
between  Departments  shall  not  commence  or  end  with  formal 
salutation; 
(f) jargon and slang shall be avoided in official correspondence; 
(g) as  far  as  possible  the  text  of an  official  correspondence shall  be 
confined to one (1) topic; 
(h) each item of correspondence shall be headed by a brief title which 
summarises the topic discussed; 
(i) paragraph and pages shall be numbered; 
(j) a copy of every item of correspondence issued from a public office 
shall be filed in that office; 
(k) the fact that there are enclosures and attachments to a letter shall 
be  clearly  indicated  in  the  form  of  a  line  drawn  in  the  margin 
against a line in which an enclosure is mentioned in the letter for the 
first time; 
(l) letter  templates shall  be  used  when  possible  to  save time.  For 
example,  routine reminders  and replies  lend  themselves  to letter 

 
110 
 
templates. The letter template should, however, be submitted for a 
specially prepared letter where the circumstances demand; 
(m) all official correspondence to and from a Ministry shall be signed by, 
or on behalf of the political or bureaucratic head of the Ministry. A 
Head of Department not located in the Ministry shall sign all official 
correspondence; 
(n) an  officer  signing  an  official  correspondence  on  behalf  of the 
Minister shall indicate his or her name and the designation or title; 
(o) advanced official correspondence may be encouraged to assist in 
the quick dispatch of official business; 
(p) due  care  shall  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  level  at  which  an  out-
going letter is  signed corresponds, as  far as  possible, to the level of 
the addressee; and, 
(q) Heads     of     Department     shall     ensure     that     copies     of     all 
correspondence are  kept  on  a ‘Float File’ which will be  circulated 
as may be directed. 
 
166. Main Registry 
(1) There shall be in each Ministry or Department, a Main Registry where 
all letters arriving by post or delivered by hand shall first be received, 
recorded and submitted to the Minister or Head of Department. 
 
(2) All  incoming  mails and  copies  of  outgoing  letters, unless otherwise 
directed, should be referred to the Minister or Head of Department 
for directions before they are sent to the Chief Director or Divisional 
Heads, respectively; 
 
(3) Prompt   action   shall be   taken   to   ensure   that   all   incoming 
correspondence   is   processed   and   dispatched   without delay. 

 
111 
 
Where a delay in dispatch is inevitable, an advanced reply shall be 
issued; 
 
(4) All important communications of general nature shall be brought to 
the attention of all members of staff as soon as they are received; 
 
(5) The Schedule Officer or Unit Head shall  monitor  the  progress  in 
dealing with the matter until it has been finally disposed of. 
 
(6) Each   Department   shall   prescribe   detailed   procedures in   its 
Operations Manual for ensuring compliance. 
 
167. Dispatch 
(1)  Outgoing mail shall be dispatched with a minimum of delay and in 
the most cost-effective manner. 
 
(2) As far as possible, outgoing letters shall be delivered by hand rather 
than sent through the post.  
 
(3) Scanned copies of official correspondence may be dispatched by 
electronic mail. 
 
(4) Letters  intended for  the  same addressee  may be  placed  in the 
same envelope. 
 
168. Manual of Registry Practice and Procedure 
A Ministry  or  Department  shall  comply  with  the procedures  contained  in 
the  Manual  of  Registry  Practice  and  Procedures  issued  by  the  Public 
Records and Archives Administration Departmen 

 
112 
 
169. Telecommunication System 
Officers   shall,   as   far   as   possible,   make   maximum   use   of   telephone 
communication in  respect  of local  transactions  in  order  to  accelerate 
Government   business.   Where,   however,   decisions   are   reached   on 
telephone  or  definite  instructions are  conveyed, they must  be  confirmed 
in writing and transmitted as soon as possible, by the originator of the call. 
 
170. Use of Intercom 
In  offices  where  there  is  a  large amount  of  internal  communication and 
staff movement that is likely to disrupt the smooth flow or work, an internal 
communication (intercom) system may be installed.  
 
171. Maintenance of Departmental Phone Directory 
A  departmental  telephone  directory  located  in  the  telephone  operating 
room  or  in  the  general  office  shall  be  prepared  and  maintained  in  each 
department where different telephone lines and extensions are in use. The 
Directory  shall  be  revised  quarterly and  shall  show  the  names  of  officers, 
their titles  and  duties.  Copies  of  this  revised Directory  shall  be  sent 
quarterly to each department. 
 
172. Policy Manuals 
Ministries  and  Departments  shall  prepare  and  maintain Policy Manuals 
containing directives  in  the form  of  circulars and  instruction  sheets  in 
which  Government  policies  are  explained  and  general  guidance  given 
regarding executive  actions.  The directives may issue  from  the  Office  of 
the   President,   Ministries, Office   of   the Head   of the Civil   Service, 
Departments and other state organisations. 
 
 

 
113 
 
173. Policy Directives 
The  directives  which  make  up  policy  manuals  shall  be  precise and 
complete.  Each  issuing authority  shall  maintain  an  up-to-date  distribution 
list  to  ensure  that  copies  of  the  directives  are  sent  only to  those  who  are 
required  to  act on  them.  Indiscriminate  distribution  is  costly  and  should 
therefore be avoided. 
 
174. Operations Manual 
Ministries   and   Departments shall   prepare   and   maintain   Operations 
Manuals which are  written  guides and  provide  a  detailed outline  of 
departmental procedures and methods of work. The Manuals shall profile 
the  personnel to carry  out various  duties  in  the  Ministry  or  Department. 
They may be used both for training and reference purposes. 
         
175. Organizational Manual 
(1) A  Ministry  or  Department,  in  consultation  with  the  Management 
Services Department, shall produce an Organizational Manual that 
provides for the structure, all the posts with the job specifications of 
each grade, which shall be reviewed every four (4) years. 
 
(2) The Organizational Manual shall contain such detail as may portray 
the  human  resource  requirement  of  the Ministry  or  Department,  its 
succession plan and its reporting structure. 
 
(3) The contents of this Manual shall include the following details:  
(a) Functions of the Ministry/Department; 
(b) Organizational Structure; 
(c) Job descriptions and Specifications; and, 

 
114 
 
(d) Rules  and  regulations issued  to  regulate  the activities  of  the 
organization.   
 
176. Manuals Coordination 
The  Research,  Statistics  and Information Management (RSIM) Directorate 
in each Ministry shall be responsible for: 
 
(a) bringing the office Manuals up-to-date; 
(b) arranging the production and distribution of the Manuals; 
(c) revision and updating of existing Manuals; and 
(d) bringing up to the notice of the Head of Civil Service, through 
the Chief Director  or  Head  of  Department any  proposals  for 
the amendment  of  the Civil  Service Code  of Conduct, Rules 
and Regulations and Administrative Instructions. 
 
177. Gazette Notice 
The Ghana Gazette shall be the main medium of communicating official 
information.  Publication  in  the  Gazette  shall  be  sufficient  notice  to  every 
Government Department. Officers will be held responsible for not ensuring 
that all changes and instructions which are gazetted are duly noted, and 
the  fact  that  no  special  instructions  have  been  received  will  not  be 
accepted as an excuse for inattention. 
 
178. Notice of Insertion in the Gazette 
Notices  for  insertion  in  the Gazette  shall be  typed  and  submitted  in 
duplicate  to  reach  the  General  Manager,  Assembly  Press  not  later  than 
the  day preceding  the  day  of  publication  of  the  Gazette  in  which  they 
are required to appear.  Notice received after the deadline may be held 
over to the following week’s issue. 
 

 
115 
 
179. Date of Publication of Gazette 
Generally,   Gazettes   are   published   weekly   on   Fridays.   Extraordinary 
Gazettes may be published only in cases of urgency and details  may be 
obtained from the Assembly Press. 
 
180. Subscription of Gazettes 
Ministries and Departments shall ensure that they renew their subscriptions 
at  least  one  month  before their subscriptions  expire. The  principal  rules 
regarding subscriptions are as follows: 
 
(a) a full  subscription  includes  the  supply  of  the  Gazette  itself and  of 
Laws and  Statutory  Instruments  but  an  individual  subscription  may 
be  taken  out  as  desired  for  the Gazette  alone,  or  for  Laws  and 
Statutory Instruments alone; and, 
(b) subscribers  to  Laws and  Statutory  Instruments  will  receive them  in  a 
form  designed  for  inclusion  in the  permanent  binders.  Additional 
copies can be obtained on payment of an additional subscription.  
 
181. Publication of Departmental Reports and Bulletins 
Departmental  reports  and  bulletins may be  published  by  the  Ministry 
responsible   for   Information   on   behalf   of   the   Ministry   or   Department 
concerned. 
 
182. Press, Radio and TV Announcements 
The Press,  Radio and  TV  are  other  channels for  communicating  official 
information. 
 
183. Meet-the-Press Encounters 
(1) Ministries and Departments shall arrange Meet-the-Press 
encounters,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Ministry  of  Information  to 

 
116 
 
inform and educate the public on their role and policies  as well as 
long-term   aims   and   objectives.   The   encounters   shall   also   be 
organized to explain issues of public interest.  
 
(2) The following procedures shall be complied with: 
 
(a) the contents of the press release shall be made known to the 
Ministry  responsible  for Information within  the  period directed 
by the Ministry prior to the day of the encounter; and, 
(b) the Ministry of Information may edit the press release either in 
whole or in part in consultation with the Ministry concerned. 
           
184. Rules for Arranging Meetings and Conferences 
The  following  rules shall  be  observed  in  arranging  inter-Ministerial  and 
Departmental meetings and conferences:  
 
(a) the staff   representing   their   departments   or   sections   at 
meetings  must  be  sufficiently  briefed  on  the subject  to  be 
discussed and  must  also  be  appropriately  qualified  for  the 
meeting;  
(b) Minutes   of   meetings   and   relevant   documents   shall   be 
circulated in good time for study; and, 
(c) due attention shall be paid to decisions reached at meetings 
for early implementation. 
 
185. Staff Durbars 
(1) Chief Directors and Heads of Department and the local CLOGSAG 
shall,  in  the  interest  of  promoting  understanding  and  achieving 
effective co-operation within Ministries  and Departments,  hold staff 
durbars quarterly. 
 

 
117 
 
(2) Heads of Class shall arrange for similar durbars for staff in that Class 
in the Service whenever they consider it practicable to do so.  
 
 
PART II 
CONFIRMATION OF ORAL INSTRUCTIONS AND INTERVIEWS 
 
186. Confirmation of Oral Instructions 
Oral   instructions   on   any   point   of   importance or   where   a   record   is 
desirable,  should  be  committed  to  writing  either  by  the  officer  who  gives 
or  by  the  officer  who  receives  the  orders,  as  may  be  most  appropriate, 
and should be signed, or otherwise confirmed in writing by the officer who 
issued them.  
         
187. Records of Interviews with Minister 
(1) When  a  Minister  grants  an  interview  to  an  officer  a  record  of  the 
interview will  be  made  by  the  officer  and  submitted  to  the  Chief 
Director concerned for confirmation. In the event of more than one 
officer   being present   at   the   interview the   record   should   be 
submitted  by  the  relatively  junior  officer present,  provided  he  is  not 
in the junior grade 
 
(2) Records should  be  kept as  short  as  possible  and  will  normally  be 
limited to the decisions taken. 
 
(3) Oral  introductions given  by  a  Minister  should  be  cleared  with  the 
Chief   Director   before   an   action   is   taken,   except   with   express 
direction or in cases of extreme urgency.  
 

 
118 
 
(4) Conversations with a Minister on official matters must not be quoted 
in  official  correspondence  unless a record  of  such  conversations, 
made  at  the  time  they  took  place  has  been  submitted  for  written 
confirmation. 
 
188. Records of Interviews with Head of Department 
The provisions  of  Administrative  Instructions 186 and  187 shall  also  apply, 
where  appropriate,  to  interviews  granted  by  a  Head  of  Department  to 
any of his subordinate officers. 
 
 
PART III 
HANDING-OVER PROCEDURE 
 
189. Handing-over of Duties 
(1)  It  shall  be  mandatory  for  all  officers  to  provide  handing-over  notes 
whenever they are handing over their duties to another Officer.  
 
(2)  In  furtherance  of 189. (1), above, the Administrative Instructions as 
provided in 190 shall be complied with.  
        
190. Details of Handing-over Notes 
In  addition  to  handing  over  all files, documents,  stores, etc. the  officer 
handing over is required to give a detailed statement as regards:  
(a) all matters affecting duties and responsibilities of his position;  
(b) key deliverables of the position; 
(c) committee assignments; 
(d) assets in his care; 
(e) particulars of any question that is likely to be a challenge; and, 

 
119 
 
(f) any  matter  requiring  special  attention  for  the  guidance  of  the 
officer taking over. 
 
191. Recall of Officer at Own Expense 
Should  it  happen  that,  after  an  officer  has  left  his  post and the  handing 
over  had not  been done thoroughly  and  systematically,  either  in  relation 
to the information supplied or the handing over of Government property, 
official  books,  documents,  etc., the officer shall be  recalled at  his  own 
expense, to render proper account of his position. 
 
192. Inventory of Property Being Handed-Over 
(1)  Where the outgoing officer is responsible for cash, furniture, stores or 
counterfoil   receipt   books,   the   incoming   officer   shall   sign   the 
inventories and books. Every officer having in his charge or custody 
articles which  are  official  property  will keep  an  inventory of  the 
property. 
 
(2) An  officer  will  be  held  personally  liable  for  any  loss  of  Government 
property which  cannot  be  traced  because  of  his  failure  to comply 
with these Instructions. 
            
193. Shortage and Damage of Property being Handed-over 
In  the event  of  there  being  any  shortage  and  damage  being  handed 
over,  the  outgoing  officer  shall  sign  an  acknowledgement  of  the  fact 
(giving  details)  and  the  incoming  officer  shall  report  the  shortage  or 
damage to the Chief Director or Head  of Department, forwarding at the 
same   time   the   explanation,   if   any,   given   of   the   deficiency   by   the 
outgoing officer. 
 

 
120 
 
194. Board of Survey to Ascertain Inventory 
(1) If  the outgoing  officer  is  too  indisposed  and  cannot  be  present  at 
the handing over, or has been authorised to leave before handing 
over  to  his  successor,  the  latter  shall  apply  to  the  Chief  Director  or 
Head  of  Department to  convene  a  Board  of  Survey  to  ascertain 
whether the cash, furniture or stores are correct or otherwise.  
 
(2) The incoming officer may be present during the proceedings of the 
Board. 
  
(3) The Board shall hand over the inventory to the incoming officer who 
shall  acknowledge the correctness  of the  inventory  in  the  manner 
detailed above.  
 
(4)   If there is a deficiency, the Board shall report the fact (with necessary 
details) to the Chief Director or Head of Department. 
 
195. Liability of Out-going Officer for Deficiencies in Inventory 
The outgoing officer will be personally liable to make good the shortage 
or damage reported upon in the manner mentioned and the incoming 
officer will be similarly liable for all shortcomings not reported but 
subsequently discovered. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
121 
 
PART IV 
STAFF RECORDS 
 
196. Definition of Records 
Office  records  shall  comprise,  among  others,  minutes  and  summaries  of 
meetings, manuals,  correspondence, returns,  reports,  directories,  forms, 
files,  registers,  accounting  documents,  legal  documents, plans,  maps, 
technical   drawings,   punched cards,   tapes,   discs,   references and 
technical  books,  newspapers,  periodical  diaries,  photographs,  posters, 
films and computer print-outs, etc. 
 
197. Staff Records 
(1) Comprehensive records on staff, relating to their appointment, age, 
family  status,  state  of health,  progression,  movement,  length  of 
service,    qualification,    special    commendation,    awards    and 
disciplinary decisions taken against them shall be forwarded by their 
Heads  of  Department  to  the  Office  of  the  Head  of Civil  Service  for 
record purposes.  
 
(2) The  records  shall  provide  the data  upon which  promotions,  special 
appointments,    retiring awards and    other    human    resource 
management decisions may be made. 
 
(3) The following permanent records shall be maintained: 
(a)  Personal Record Form; 
(b)  Record of Sick and Maternity Leave; 
(c)  Procedure for using Sick and Maternity Leave Record; 
(d)  Vacation Leave; and, 
(e)  Leave With or Without Pay. 

 
122 
 
 
(4)  Chief  Directors and Heads  of  Department  should  request  Directors 
or   officers   of   analogous   grade   to   complete   and   submit   their 
curriculum vitae to the Head of Civil Service every two (2) years. This 
should  be  used  in  updating particulars  on  personal records  except 
the date of birth. 
 
198. Distribution of Copies of Personal Records 
(1) Copies   of   the Personal   Records shall   be prepared   for every 
departmental  officer  by  the Department  to  which  the  officer was 
first appointed. One copy shall be retained in the Department and 
the original copy sent to the Office of the Head of Civil Service. 
 
(2)  A  copy of  the completed Personal  Record Form shall  be  prepared 
by  the  Head  of Department for  every staff in the General Class  on 
first  appointment.  The  Head  of Department shall  retain  one  copy 
and send one copy to the Office of the Head of Civil Service to be 
placed on his or her Personal Master File. 
 
199. Department Copy 
It shall be the responsibility of the Head of Department to ensure that the 
copies of the completed Personal Record Forms  are kept up to date. He 
will be required to cross-check, from time to time, with the record kept in 
the Office of the Head of Civil Service. 
 
200. Movement of Personal Record Forms 
(1)  The  Departmental  copy  of  the  Personal  Record Form  of  a  staff  of 
the Civil Service shall move with the officer from one Department to 
another. 

 
123 
 
(2)  The Head of Department shall report immediately in the prescribed 
form   to   the   Office   of   the   Head   of   Civil   Service   and   where 
appropriate  to  the Heads of Department where the officer has  to 
transfer Personal Record Forms to other Departments. 
 
201. Central Control of Personal Record Forms 
The Office of the Head of the Civil Service shall ensure that:  
 
 
(a) Chief   Directors   and Heads   of   Department   maintain Personal 
Records Forms for staff  of  the Civil  Service who  are  posted  to  their 
Departments;  
(b) Chief  Directors  and Heads  of Department  submit to  the OHCS 
copies of completed Personal Record Forms; 
(c) Chief  Directors  and Heads  of  Department  notify  the  OHCS  without 
delay  of  all  changes   that  affect  the  records  held  by  the  OHCS; 
and, 
(d) copies  of  Personal Forms  held  by  the  OHCS  are  maintained  up-to-
date.   This calls   for   a   periodic   cross-check with Departmental 
records maintained on the Officers at their current posting. 
 
202. Movement of Records of Sick, Maternity and Leave History 
(1)  The  record  on Sick Leave, Maternity  Leave  and  Leave  History  shall 
move with the officer. Heads of Department shall observe the same 
rules  as they apply  to  Personal  Record Forms  and  Leave  History 
Sheet. 
 
(2)  Record Forms  on  Sick, Maternity  Leave  and  Leave  History  shall  be 
maintained  only  at  the Head  Office  of the Department.  The  OHCS 
shall  be  notified, and  where appropriate,  Heads of Department 

 
124 
 
shall  annually submit  records of how  much  sick  or maternity  leave 
has been granted to each officer during the year. 
 
 
PART V 
RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
203. Classification of Records 
An   official   record   shall be   suitably   classified,   coded   and   indexed. 
Guidelines  on  classification  and  indexing  of  documents  are  contained in 
the Office  Records Procedure  Manual  and  the  Procedural  Manual  for 
Unrestructured  Records Offices,  produced  by  the  Public Records  and 
Archives Administration Department (PRAAD).  
 
204. Application of Rules to Register Filing Activities 
(1) Rules  contained in the  Office  Records  Procedure  Manuals  shall 
apply to the filing, movement and retrieval of documents.  
 
(2) The  following  rules  shall  be  observed in  the  filing,  movement  and 
retrieval of documents:  
 
(a) Records  shall be  filed  according  to  the  frequency  of  usage 
e.g. 
i. Active  files  may  be  housed  in  easily  accessible  filing 
cabinets and cupboards in Records Offices. 
ii. Inactive   records   or   records   to   which   less   frequent 
reference is made, may be stored in the Records Stores 
of Institutions  and  after  five  years transferred  to  the 
National  Records Centre  of  the  Public  Records  and 
Archives Administration Department (PRAAD).  

 
125 
 
iii. Vital  Records should  be  identified  and stored  in  well-
secured locations. 
iv. The Director of PRAAD may be consulted for advice on 
the subject. 
 
(b) Movement of  documents  within  and between  Departments 
shall be recorded properly to facilitate their retrieval.   
 
205. Departmental Programme for the Review of Records 
Every Ministry  or  Department  shall  maintain  a  regular  programme  for 
reviewing  its  records  in  order  to ensure  that  all  documents  which  have 
outlived their usefulness are disposed of, accordingly. Methods of records 
disposal  are  governed  by  the Omnibus  Schedule for  Retention  and 
Disposal of Public Records. 
 
206. Preservation and Disposal of Documents 
(1) The  preservation  and  disposal  of  official  documents  are  governed 
by the Disposition and Retention Schedules provided by PRAAD. 
 
(2) When  requested  to  do so  by  the Director  of  PRAAD  from  time  to 
time, Heads  of  Department  should  prepare  and  revise  disposal 
schedules on the appropriate forms as provided by any Regulations 
in  force,  and  forward  to  the  PRAAD  for  consideration  by  the 
Records  Advisory  Committee  of  PRAAD, regarding  the  disposal  of 
the documents. 
 
(3) A copy of the Disposal Schedule will be returned by the Director to 
the  Head  of the  Department  who  will  transfer  those  documents 

 
126 
 
ordered  to  be  transferred  by  PRAAD  and destroy those  authorised 
for destruction by PRAAD. 
 
207. Destruction of Documents 
Disposal  Schedules  must  be  carefully  preserved  in  order  that  a  record 
exists of documents destroyed or transferred to PRAAD. 
             
208. Documents not to be Destroyed 
(1) The  following are  some  of  the  documents which  should not  be 
destroyed:  
 
(a) documents required by law to be preserved; 
(b) documents   of   historical   or   other interest   including   those 
relating  to  the  history,  constitution,  administration  etc.  of  the 
departments, appointments of officers and others  as shall be 
prescribed by the Records Advisory Committee of PRAAD; 
(c) documents  relating  to  land  and  claims  thereto,  and to  the 
value of land and property, especially Government land and 
forests etc.; and, 
(d) Gazettes and Government Publications. 
 
(2) No   recommendation   is to   be   made   to the   Records   Advisory 
Committee for the destruction of official Records until their minimum 
Retention period is due.   
 
209. Departmental Records 
Every Head of Department is required to ensure that adequate measures 
are  taken  for  the  care  and preservation  of  permanent  departmental 
records, books and documents of value (Vital Records). 
 

 
127 
 
210.  General Schedule 
The Public  Records  and  Archives  Administration  Department  (PRAAD)will 
prepare  from  time  to  time a  General  Schedule  of  various  documents 
which are common to all or several Departments. This schedule will direct 
at  what  age  such  documents  should  be  transferred to  the National 
Records Centre or Archives Division of PRAAD or destroyed.  
 
211. Specific Schedule  
Institutions    in   consultation   with PRAAD,    should   develop   Retention 
Schedules  specific  to  their  mandate  or  records  that  are  not  covered  by 
the General Retention Schedule. 
 
212. Records Committee 
Records  Disposal  Committee  shall  be  appointed  in  each department, 
upon  the  advice  of  the  Director  of  PRAAD,  to  co-ordinate  and  supervise 
its  records  disposal  work. On  no  account  however,  may  an  official 
document  be  destroyed except  as  provided  for  in the  Retention  and 
Disposition Schedules. 
  
213. Shredding or Burning 
Records  may  be  destroyed  by  either  shredding  or  burning.  For  security 
reasons   all documents   of confidential   nature   shall   be   destroyed   by 
burning/shredding  under  close supervision  by  the  Records  Committee. A 
certificate   of   destruction   should   be   issued   by   PRAAD   to   cover   the 
destroyed records.  
 
 
 
 

 
128 
 
214. Violation of Security Rule on Disposal of Records 
Disciplinary   action   shall   be   taken   against   an   officer   who   allows 
documents approved for destruction to fall into the hands of unauthorized 
persons. 
 
215. Maintenance of Sheet on every Record Destroyed 
A schedule listing line by line the following data in respect of each record 
destroyed shall be maintained:  
 
(a)      date of destruction; 
(b)      index number of documents in lots e.g. file, tray or cards, etc.; 
(c)      brief description of subjects contained in the documents; 
(d)      method pf destruction; 
(e)      signature of officer authorizing destruction; and, 
(f)      signature of officer supervising destruction. 
 
216. Reuse of Retrieved Materials 
In the process of records disposal, file covers, binders and other materials 
may be retrieved, where possible for reuse. 
217. Misuse of Records and Stationery 
Disciplinary  action  shall  be  taken  against  any  Civil  Service staff  who  uses 
or  permits  the  use  of  office  materials  such  as  forms,  envelopes,  maps, 
drawing sheets, brown paper and blotting papers for unofficial purposes. 
 
218. Judicious Use of Materials 
(1) Used stationery should be saved and reused whenever possible. 
 
(2)  Books  and  registers shall  not  be  used  as  seat  adjusters.  Suitable 
cushions  shall  be  provided  where  the  right  type  of furniture  is  not 
available.   

 
129 
 
219. Management Services Department and the Creation of Forms  
All  new  Forms  shall  be  subject  to  approval  by the  Management  Services 
Department of the Office of the Head of the Civil of Service. 
 
220. Forms and Records 
A Head of Department shall: 
(a) maintain   an   up-to-date   inventory   of   all   forms   used   in   the 
Department; 
(b) undertake regular review of all forms to ensure that those in use are 
up-to-date and obsolete ones are discarded; and, 
(c) ensure   that   departmental   records   are   properly   managed   and 
controlled in   accordance   with   Administrative   Instructions   and 
departmental Operations Manuals. 
 
 
PART VI 
OFFICE MACHINES AND EQUIPMENT 
 
221. Rules for Upkeep of Machines and Equipment 
(1) Good care shall be taken of all machines  and equipment that are 
assigned to an office. The following rules shall be observed:  
 
(a)     Office Machines shall be adequately protected against dust 
when not in use; 
(b)     Office machines shall be kept in a locked place after office 
hours; 
(c)     Office  machines  shall  be  cleaned  frequently  and  regularly; 
and, 
(d)     a maintenance schedule for servicing office machines. 
 

 
130 
 
222. Purchase of Office Machinery 
Ministries    and    Departments    shall    purchase    office    machinery    and 
equipment   in   accordance   the   procedures   outlined   in   the   Public 
Procurement  Act,  2003  (Act  663)  as  amended in  2016 (Act  914) and the 
Public Financial Management Act, 2016 (921) and subsequently from time 
to time. 
 
223. Entity Tender Committee 
Office machinery, furniture and furnishings, as well as other procurements 
by   Ministries   and   Departments shall   conform   to   the   standards   and 
specifications  indicated  in  the  advertisements  for  their  purchase  by  the 
Entity Tender Committee. 
 
224. Composition of Entity Tender Committee 
(1) The  membership  of  the  Entity  Tender  Committee  shall  be  as  spelt 
out  in  the  Public  Procurement  Act,  2003  (Act  663)  as  amended in 
2016  (Act  914)  and  the Public Financial  Management  Act,  2016 
(921), and subsequently from time to time.  
 
(2) A Ministry or Department shall dispose of obsolete office machinery, 
furniture  and  furnishings  and other  stores  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions of   the   Public   Procurement   Act,   2003   (Act   663)   as 
amended in 2016 (Act 914) and subsequently from time to time. 
 
(3) Disposal of obsolete store items shall be by public auction. 
 
225. Inventory of Office Stores 
(1) A record of all office stores be kept by all Ministries and 
Departments and shall be updated from half yearly. 

 
131 
 
(2) Chief Directors and Heads of Department shall maintain a half 
yearly inventory of all office stores under their control. 
 
(3) The maintenance of a half yearly updated inventory of office stores 
shall be a rating factor in their annual performance agreements 
and evaluation. 
 

 
132 
 
CHAPTER 7: GENERAL SERVICES 
PART I 
DESCRIPTION OF GENERAL SERVICES 
 
226. Description of General Services 
The  principal  general services  in  the  context of  office  administration for 
the Civil Service are  
(a) Messenger Service; 
(b) Custody of Records: 
(c) Reception Service; 
(d) Transport Service; 
(e) Office Security;  
(f) Client or Customer Service; and 
(g) Estate and Janitorial Service. 
 
227. Duties of Messengers 
Messengers  shall  perform  such  duties  as  are  set  out  in  their  letters  of 
appointment.  These  may  vary  from  one Civil Service  organization  to 
another,  but  will  normally  include  conveying messages  and  material, 
clearing   of   desks   and   trays,   subject to distributing   files   and   similar 
documents, as and when necessary. 
 
228. Delivery of Letters to Destination Nearer than Post Offices to Office 
Messengers  on  dispatch  duties  shall  not  post  a  letter  which  can  quickly 
and more conveniently be delivered by hand rather than by post. 
 
 
 
 

 
133 
 
229. Means of Transportation 
The  most  convenient  means  of transport  may  be  provided  for  the  use  of 
messengers who go out on long distance errands and dispatch duties. 
 
230. Carrying of Classified Documents by Messengers 
Messengers may not be allowed to carry classified documents, unless the 
requisite   security   arrangements   have   been   put   in   place   by   the 
dispatching Ministry or Department.  
 
231. A Reception or Public Enquiry Point 
A Reception or a Public Enquiry Point shall be established and located at 
a  convenient  place  in  each  Ministry  or  Department,  especially  in  those 
areas where there is a large number of visitors. 
 
232. A Nominal Directory Kept at Reception 
A Directory listing the names of officers in the Ministry or Department, their 
office  room  numbers, telephone  contacts,  their  titles  and  duties, shall  be 
maintained  at all  Receptions  or  Public  Enquiry  Points  to  be  used  as  a 
guide for visitors. 
 
233. Waiting Rooms at Reception 
(1) Waiting rooms and facilities such as washrooms shall be provided at 
reception areas for the use of visitors. 
 
(2) Ministries  and  Departments  should  be  minded to  provide  access    
and other needs for persons with disability. 
      
 
 

 
134 
 
234. Clerical Duties and Receptionists 
 A  receptionist  may  be  assigned  other  duties  as  may  be  considered 
necessary, such as clerical duties. 
 
235. Transport Facilities 
Chief  Directors  and  Heads  of  Department  shall  ensure  that  adequate 
transport facilities are provided to meet such needs as: 
 
(a)   collection and delivery of mail and office supplies; 
(b)   conveyance of officials on duty; 
(c) conveyance  of  employees in  appropriate  cases  from and  to  their    
homes; 
(d) conveyance of official visitors. 
 
236. Office Security 
Security Instructions for Ghana Government Offices, issued by the National 
Security Council, acting for the Government, on March 31,  1996,  for both 
at home and abroad, shall be observed by all Departments. 
      
237. Enforcement of Rules 
(1) Chief  Directors  and  Heads  of  Department  shall ensure  that  staff  of 
the  Service  rigidly  observe the  rules  regarding  official  documents, 
telephone  conversations,  office  facilities,  and  keys  of  offices  and 
the entire office premises. 
 
(2) The  Estate  Unit,  in  particular,  shall  be  responsible  for  the  custody 
and general upkeep of the Ministry or Department.   
 
 
 

 
135 
 
238. Protection of Classified Information 
The  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  shall  ensure  that  the  following 
rules are observed. 
(1) Office documents especially those containing classified information 
shall   be   adequately protected   so   that   they do not   fall   into 
unauthorized  hands.  The  following  security  classification  shall  be 
employed in the Civil Service. 
(a) Top Secret; 
(b) Secret; 
(c) Confidential; and, 
(d) Restricted. 
 
(2) Chapter  4  of  Security  Instruction for  Ghana Government  Offices, 
1996, provides  a  guide  for determining  security  classifications  as 
follows: 
 
(a) the classifications “Top Secret” will be employed  whenever 
information and material the unauthorized disclosure of which 
would cause exceptionally grave damage to the nation; 
(b) the classifications  “Secret” and  “Confidential”  will  be 
employed whenever a document is of such a nature and it is 
undesirable  that  its  existence  or  contents  should be  known 
other than to those senior officers, or the staff of Special Care 
Registries  where  such documents  are  kept,  whose duties 
make this knowledge essential; 
(c) the  classification  “Restricted’  is  to  be  used  where  any 
information  or  material requires  security  protection  and  does 
not   qualify   for   the   special   precaution   required   of the 
classifications “Confidential”  or  “Secret”  (e.g.    papers, 
personnel   matters   including   disciplinary   recommendations 

 
136 
 
and any other matter, knowledge of which is to be restricted 
entirely to Government officers); and, 
(d) documents  received  from  other  Government  offices  should 
not be  down-graded  without the approval  of  the originating 
office. 
 
(3) Matters  of  a  confidential  nature  shall  not  be  discussed on  the 
telephone,  since  telephone  conversations  are  prone  to  the  risk  of 
being overheard either accidentally or by design. 
 
(4) Key   to   filing   cabinets,   safes   and   offices   containing   classified 
material  shall  be  safely  kept.  The  custody  of  the  duplicate  keys  to 
safes  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the provisions  of  Public  Financial 
Management  Regulations,  2019  (LI  2378),  and  duplicate  keys  to 
filing  cabinets  containing  classified  documents,  value  books,  etc. 
shall  be  lodged  in  the  Safe  of  the  Chief  Director  of  the Ministry  or 
Head of Department or by an authorised representative. 
 
(5) All   buildings   in   which   classified   documents   or material   are 
processed or  stored  shall  be  made  secure.  It  is  important  that 
adequate arrangements are made for the control of visitors against 
unauthorized entry into rooms where security material are kept. 
 
(6) Ministries  and  Departments  shall  deploy  Security guards  or  night 
watchmen, as appropriate, at all times. Persons to be employed on 
security  work  as  document  handlers  or  security  guards  must be 
made to undergo thorough screening.  
 

 
137 
 
(7) Generally,  to  enhance  the  security  of  the  office,  reduce  nuisance 
and  promote  productivity,  officers  shall  minimize  the  number  of 
visitors they receive while at work. 
 
239. Mode of Dispatching Classified Material 
(1)  Communications  classified  as  “Restricted” should  be  so  headed 
and  may  be  dispatched  under  single  cover  but  in such  cases  the 
classification “Restricted” should not appear on the cover. 
 
(2)  “Confidential”  or  “Secret”  correspondence  will  be  appropriately 
headed and will be dispatched under sealed double cover. 
         
240. Responsibility of Officers for Security 
All  officers shall  be responsible for  the  security  of  classified  documents  as 
may be held in their custody. 
 
241. Authority for Releasing Classified Correspondence to a Private Person 
(1)  All official correspondence   or   records   must   not   be   shown   or 
produced or copies communicated to a private person without the 
express permission of a responsible senior officer.  
 
(2)  If    a    decision    arrived    on    any    correspondence    is    to    be 
communicated  to  such  a  person,  it  shall  be done  in  accordance 
with all relevant laws.  
 
242. House-keeping and Janitorial Services 
House-keeping and janitorial service in an office comprises the following: 
 
(a) sweeping and cleaning; 
(b) landscaping grounds maintenance; 

 
138 
 
(c) planning of the use of office space; and, 
(d) acquisition,  maintenance  and  distribution  of  office  supplies  and 
equipment such as stationery, furniture, machinery, first-aid kit, toilet 
facilities, electricity supply and water supply. 
 
243. Responsibility of Chief Directors and Heads of Department for House-
keeping and Janitorial Services 
(1) A Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department shall ensure  that  the 
services and facilities are provided and that any other requirements 
relating to office work are satisfactorily met. 
 
(2) The  provision of  satisfactory  housekeeping  and  janitorial  services 
shall  be a  rating  factor  for  the  annual  performance  agreements 
and evaluation of Chief Directors and Heads of Department. 
 
244. Secretarial Services  
(1) The  following  rules  shall  be observed  in  every  office in  relation  to 
secretarial services: 
 
 
(a) care  shall  be  taken  to  limit  the  number  of  copies  of  typed 
and reproduced documents to actual requirements; and, 
(b) as far as possible, duplicating and other reproduction services 
shall be shared between two or more offices or departments.  
 
(2) In appropriate cases, where an officer lacks the requisite machine, 
or,  where  the  existing  machine  capacity is  inadequate,  a  paid 
reproduction service may be obtained.  
 
 
 

 
139 
 
PART II 
UTILITIES AND SUPPLIES 
 
245. Application for Use of Postal Services 
Postal services shall include carriage and distribution of mail, allocation of 
letter  boxes,  supply  of  mail  bags,  sale  of stamps and  other  financial 
services.  
 
246. Official Postal Services not to be used for Personal/Private Purposes 
(1) Chief Directors and Heads  of Department shall ensure that services 
that  are  provided  officially  are not  used  for  private  and  personal 
purposes.  
(2) Civil  Service  staff may,  however,  use  official  postal  addresses  for 
their personal correspondence. 
 
247. Telecommunication Services 
Ministries     and     Departments shall     subscribe     to     their     preferred 
telecommunication    service    provider, including the provision and 
maintenance  of  their  telephone  facilities  and  other  telecommunications 
services. 
 
248. Surcharge for Telecommunication Service for Private Purposes 
Telecommunication  services  may  be  used  only  for  official  purposes.  Any 
expenditure   on such   services   which   is improperly   charged   to   the 
Consolidated  Fund  shall  be  dealt  with  in  accordance  with the  relevant 
provisions under the Public  Financial  Management  Regulations,  2019  (LI 
2378). 
 
 

 
140 
 
249. State-owned Motor Vehicles for Official Use 
Chief  Directors  and Heads  of  Department  shall  in  the  first  instance,  make 
use,  as  appropriate,  of  all  state-owned  transport  companies  should  the 
need arise for them to procure private transport services.  
 
250. Hiring of Motor Vehicles for Official Use 
Chief  Directors  and Heads  of  Department  shall  apply  to  state-owned 
transport companies, in the first instance, for the hiring of motor vehicle for 
official use. 
 
251. Electricity Services 
A  Ministry  or  Department,  through  its  Estate  Unit,  shall  arrange  with  the 
appropriate  electricity  company  for  its  buildings  to  be  connected  to 
electricity supply. 
 
252. Payment for Electricity Services by Departments 
Ministries   and   Departments shall   budget annually   for   the   supply   of 
electricity  to their  offices  and  pay  promptly  for  electricity  consumed by 
them.  They  are  also required  to  provide  their  own  electrical  needs  in 
respect of such items as bulbs, air-conditioners and refrigerators etc. 
 
253. Electricity Faults 
Faults in the electricity supply shall be reported immediately to the service 
provider. 
 
254.  Water Supply 
Ministries and Departments shall ensure that their office buildings shall be 
connected to water supply. 
 

 
141 
 
255. Faults in Water Supply System 
Faults in the water supply system shall be rectified immediately or reported 
without delay to the Ghana Water Company for redress.  
 
256. Payment for Water Supply Services 
Ministries and Departments shall pay promptly for water supplied to them 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
142 
 
CHAPTER 8: REMUNERATION 
PART 1 
SALARIES 
 
257. Salary Scales 
(1) Salaries in the Civil Service shall be determined by  job analysis and 
evaluation   of   the   content,   and   other   characteristics   of   work 
performed in the various grades. 
 
(2) A   person   appointed to   a   vacant   post   shall enjoy   the   same 
emoluments  as  appropriate  to  the  post  unless  otherwise  stated  in 
his/her letter of appointment. 
 
(3) The salary scale corresponding to each post in the Civil Service are 
issued  by  the  Office  of  the  Head  of  Civil  Service  from  time  to  time, 
based on Public Services salary reviews.  
 
258. Award of Salary Increment 
(1) All Civil   Service   staff shall   be   eligible   to earn   annual   salary 
increment,   in   accordance   with   prevailing   Government   Policy, 
unless conduct and job performance are unsatisfactory. 
 
 (2) The  incremental  date  of  the salary  of  staff  of  the  Civil  Service 
appointed  on  recruitment or promotion  shall  be  the anniversary  of 
the  first  day  of  the  month  following that  which  the  appointment 
takes  effect,  except  that  his  appointment takes  effect on  the  first 
day of the month then the incremental date shall be the same day. 
 
 

 
143 
 
259. Salary when Officer is Promoted on his Incremental Date 
The   salary   of   an   officer   promoted on   his   incremental   date   will   be 
calculated as if he had received an increment on his scale on the day of 
his promotion. 
         
260. Incremental Rate 
Salary  increments,  where  applicable, accrue  annually  and  the rates  at 
which  they  are  payable  vary  from  one  level  to  another,  in  accordance 
with the prevailing Public Services Pay Policy.  
 
261. Eligibility for Salary Increment  
Increments  are  not  to  be  recommended  as  a  matter  of  routine  or  as  an 
increase  of  pay  to  which an  officer  is  entitled  merely  because he  has 
served  an  additional  twelve  (12)  months.  The  holder  of  an  office  is  not 
entitled  to  any  increment  as  of  right  but  only on approval of  the  Chief 
Director or Head of Department. 
 
262. Withholding of Increments  
 (1) Where in the opinion of a supervising officer, the performance of a 
Civil  Service  staff has  not  been  satisfactory, he shall make  the 
necessary recommendations to   the  Chief   Director   or   Head   of 
Department. 
 
           (2)  The Chief Director or the Head of Department shall make necessary 
recommendations to  the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service,  stating  reasons 
why the increment must be so withheld.   
 
(3) When the Head of the Civil Service comes to the determination that 
the increment of a staff of the Civil Service should be suspended or 

 
144 
 
withheld,  the Head  of the  Civil  Service  shall  submit necessary 
recommendations to the Civil Service Council for consideration. 
 
(4) When  the  Civil  Service  Council  upholds  the  recommendation  to 
suspend  or  withhold the  increment,  the  Chief Director or Head  of 
Department   shall   inform   the officer concerned,   with   a   brief 
statement  of the reasons,  that  the  increment  has  been suspended 
or withheld  until  such  time  as  he  has  earned  its  restoration  by  an 
improvement in the standard of his work.  
 
(5) The Chief Director or Head of Department shall consequently inform 
the  accounting  authority of  the suspension  or  withholding of  the 
increment.  
 
(6) When  Management  is  satisfied  that  the officer has earned  the 
restoration  of  his  increment the Chief Director or the Head  of 
Department shall: 
 
(a) inform the officer that the increment is restored; and, 
  (b) inform the accounting authority accordingly. 
 
263. Incremental Award for Temporary Service   
No  incremental  credit  shall  be  granted  on  appointment  for  previous 
temporary service.  
 
264. Calculation of Salary on Promotion 
(1)   Where an  officer  is  promoted  from  a  grade,  the  salary  scale  of 
which  overlaps the  scale  applicable  to  the  promotion  grade,  and 
his  salary  before  promotion  is  the  same  as  or  higher  than  the 
minimum  of the  scale  attached  to  the  promotion  grade,  he  will 

 
145 
 
enter  the new  scale  at  a  point  two  (2)  incremental  steps  over  and 
above the salary he was drawing before promotion.  
 
(2)      Where there is no overlap in salary scales but the maximum point of        
the  salary  scale  attached  to  the  grade  before  promotion  is  only 
one incremental  movement/step  below  the  minimum  point  of  the 
scale  attached  to the  promotion  grade  and  an  officer  is  on  the 
maximum point of his  present grade he will,  on promotion enter his 
new scale at the second point. 
 
(3)      Where  an  officer  is  promoted  from  a  grade  which  carries  a  higher 
salary scale than that of the promotion grade, the officer will retain 
the higher salary scale as personal to himself. 
 
 
PART II 
ALLOWANCES AND ADVANCES 
 
265. Allowances     
(1) Staff of the Civil Service shall be paid the appropriate allowances in 
accordance with prevailing Government Policy.  
 
(2) Guidelines shall  be  issued  by  the appropriate  authority  for  the 
following facilities: 
 
(a) Allowances and benefits for any services rendered by a 
Civil  Service  staff in  the  course  of  his  employment, 
including overtime allowances; and, 
(b) Welfare Schemes. 
 

 
146 
 
266. Advances     
(1) Staff  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  be  eligible  for  salary  advance  and 
advances  for the  purchase  of  means of  transport  in  accordance 
with prevailing Government Policy.  
 
(2) Guidelines shall  be  issued  by the  appropriate  authority  for  the 
management of these advances. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
147 
 
CHAPTER 9: STAFF WELFARE 
PART 1 
ACCOMMODATION 
 
267. Allocation Authority 
The allocation of Government residential accommodation shall be done 
by the Bungalow Allocation Committee constituted by the Ministry of 
Works and Housing including a representative of the Head of Civil Service. 
 
268. Eligibility for Accommodation 
Subject to the availability of resources, Government is obliged  to provide 
accommodation for staff of the Civil Service as follows: 
 
 
(1) Residential accommodation 
(a) Government accommodation may be allocated to officers if 
available,  and  among  other  things, an officer’s rank, marital 
status, and nature of work, shall be taken into account. 
(b) If the duties of a junior officer necessitate his  being available 
at any hour of the day or night, he may be required to live in 
specific accommodation in the vicinity of his work. 
 
(2) Under    special circumstances,     officers     may    occupy     hotel 
accommodation, subject to the prior approval of the Chief Director 
or the Head of Department and in such cases, the cost of bed only 
shall  be  met  from  the  appropriate  vote.  No  other  charges may  be 
included for this category of officers. 
 
(3) When  applying  for residential  accommodation,  a  staff  of  the Civil 
Service   should   do   so   through   the   Chief   Director   or   Head   of 
Department.  The  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  will  be 

 
148 
 
notified  as  soon  as an allocation  is  made,  and where  none  is 
available,   the   Chief   Director   or   Head   of   Department   will   be 
informed. 
 
269. Role of Regional and District Coordinating Director 
Where a staff of the Civil Service has  been posted to a Region or District, 
the  officer  on  arrival,  will  report to  the  Chief  Director  of  the  Regional 
Coordinating  Council  or  the  District  Coordinating  Director  as  the  case 
may be, for consideration of allocation of accommodation, if needed. 
 
270. Obligation of Tenants of Government Accommodation 
An officer  who  has  been  provided with  Government  accommodation is 
himself liable to disciplinary action, if he: 
 
(a) sublets it or any part of it or takes in a paying guest; or, 
(b) fails to vacate it on being required to do so. 
 
271. Care of Property 
Officers  occupying  Government  accommodation  are  expected  to  keep 
all  furniture,  fixtures and  fittings  in  good condition.  Failure  to do so  will  be 
dealt  with  in  accordance with  the  relevant  provisions  of  Public  Financial 
Management Regulations, 2019 (LI 2378). 
 
272. Handing Over Government Residence in a Tenantable Condition 
(1)  An   officer, when   vacating   Government   accommodation, shall 
ensure that the premises is in a tenantable condition state. 
  
(2)  If  it  is  found  necessary  to  replace  any  furniture  broken  or  lost,  to 
repair  any  damage done  and  cost  it  against  the  tenancy  of the 
outgoing   officer,   or   to   clean   the   premises   before   it   can   be 

 
149 
 
occupied  again he  shall  be  held  liable, the  matter  shall  be  dealt 
with  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  provisions  of  Public  Financial 
Management Regulations, 2019 (LI 2378). 
 
273. Sitting Tenant to Be Accountable for Damages 
(1) Defects or damage not reported in writing by an officer at the time 
when  he took  the  accommodation  will  be  presumed  to  have 
occurred   during   his   tenancy.   The   occupant   is   responsible for 
reporting  any  damage  that may  be  caused  to  the  premises  or 
fittings in writing to the Public Works Department for maintenance. 
 
(2) The   cleaning   of   the compound,   drainage   and   the   general 
environment of  government  residential  premises  should  be  the 
direct responsibility of the occupants of the premises. 
 
274. Payment of Rent 
Rent  will  normally  be  charged  where  government  accommodation is 
provided, in accordance with approved rates. The following rules shall be 
observed, accordingly. 
 
(a) An  officer  is  liable  to payment  for as  long  as  the  accommodation 
remains allocated to him. 
(b) The  officer  will  normally  be  liable  to  pay  rent  at  the  full  rate  with 
effect from a date not later than seven (7) days after the allocation, 
unless they can satisfy the Allocation Committee within the time limit 
as to the reasons for delay occupation. 
(c)  A Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  who  is  in  doubt  as  to  the 
rent   to   be   paid   in   any   case should   consult   the   appropriate 
Allocation Committee which will, if necessary, ask the rent office for 
the rate. 

 
150 
 
(d) Where  Government  accommodation  has  been  allocated  to  an 
officer who later declines the offer, that officer will be liable to pay 
rent from the date of allocation unless he notifies his Chief Director 
or  Head  of  Department  in  advance  that  he  no  longer  wishes  to 
avail himself of the offer. 
(e) An  officer  who occupies  one  room  in a government  rest  house  will 
be charged rent at the rate applicable to that particular rest house. 
(f) In   exceptional   cases, such   as   dormitory   accommodation   in 
Government Institutions, the Allocation Committee may authorize a 
reduction  of  the  charges,  where  in the  opinion  of  the  Allocation 
Committee   the   payment   of   rent   in   accordance with   these 
provisions  is  excessive  by  reason  of  the  sub-standard  nature  of  the 
accommodation. 
(g) Staff   of   the   Civil   Service   will   be   required   to   pay   rent   when 
occupying accommodation rented by Government in accordance 
with approved rates. 
(h)   payment  of  rent  shall  be  deductible  at  source  by  the  Controller 
and Accountant-General Department. 
 
275. Classification of Accommodation 
(1) For     the     purpose     of     correct     rent     assessment,     residential 
accommodation will be classified as follows: 
 
 
A – Furnished building (Flat or House); 
B – Unfurnished Building (Flat or House); and, 
C – Bed sitter units 
 
(2)  Rates  of  rent  to  be  paid  shall  be  the approved-levels  for  the  time 
being in force. 
 

 
151 
 
(3)  The  classification  to  be  assigned  to  any  accommodation  shall  be 
determined by the Allocation Committee; 
 
(4) Apart from rent, all other fees and charges in respect of utilities shall 
be borne by the sitting tenant. 
 
276. Allocation of Government Accommodation 
The   following are   the   guidelines   for   the   allocation   of   Government 
accommodation in the Civil Service: 
 
 
a) Government, as and   when   available, shall provide suitable 
accommodation  for officers  who, by  the  terms  and  conditions  of 
service    of their    appointment, are    entitiled    to    Government 
accommodation; 
b) in  the  consideration  of  accommodation for  other  staff,  special 
preference shall be given to married staff of the Civil Service; 
c) the  Public  Works Department  is  required,  on allocation, to  provide 
mosquito and burglar proofing at the premises of the officer; 
d) the  Public  Works  Department shall  be responsible  for  the  proper   
maintenance   of   all   premises,   including   external   and   internal 
painting of the premises. 
 
277. Vacation of Government Accommodation 
(1)  Normally, a staff of the Civil Service will only be required to vacate 
his accommodation when: 
 
 
(a) he proceeds to another station on posting or transfer; 
(b) in  the  case  of  an expatriate  officer, he  proceeds  on an  end 
of duty tour;  
(c) he  proceeds  on  leave  without pay  for  a  period  exceeding 
twelve (12) months; and, 

 
152 
 
(d) he leaves the Service or, in any case, not more than three (3) 
months after leaving the service. 
 
(2) Variations from subparagraph (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this Instruction 
may  only be  made  with  the  written  approval  of  the  Allocation 
Committee, obtained in advance. 
 
278. Vacation of Government Accommodation in Accra 
(1) When an officer is about to leave a Government accommodation, 
the Head of Department must inform the Secretary of the Allocation 
Committee,  in writing, at  least three  (3) months  from the  date  on 
which the premises should be vacated. 
 
(2) Copies of the letter must be served on the Estate Officer, the Public 
Works Department and all utility providers. 
 
(3) The    Estate    Officer of    the Ministry    or    Department    or    their 
representative and the Public Works Department shall:  
(a) check the furniture with the outgoing occupant who shall sign 
the inventory; 
(b) take over the keys; and, 
(c) keep   a   copy   of   every   inventory   for   the   PWD   or   Works 
Department of the respective Ministry or Department. 
 
 
279. Vacation of Government Accommodation Outside Accra 
(1) When  an  officer  is  about  to  vacate  Government  accommodation 
at   an   outstation, the Department   shall   notify   the   Allocation 
Committee and the PWD.  

 
153 
 
(2) The  latter will  arrange  for  an  officer  to  inspect  the  premises  and  to 
check  the  furniture  fixtures  and  fittings  shortly  before  the departure 
of the outgoing occupants. 
 
(3) An out-going   occupant   of Government accommodation   shall 
arrange with the utility service providers to read their meters on the 
premises on the day of departure. 
 
(4) On  the  day  of  departure, the officer  shall  leave  the  premises 
securely  locked  and  deposit  the  keys  of  the  outside  doors  with  the 
Estate Officer or the Public Works Department. 
 
(5) If  the  Estate  officer  or the  Public  Works  Department,  on  being 
notified  of  the  time  of  the  vacation  of  the  premises,  is  unable  to 
provide   the   representative   to   check   the   inventory   before   the 
departure  of  the  out-going  occupant,  he  shall  notify  the  Head  of 
Department of the time at which he will be able to do so.  
 
(6) The  Head  of  Department  shall  then  nominate  an  officer  to  take 
over   from   the outgoing   officer   and   to   hand   over   to   the 
representative of the PWD at the time stated. 
 
(7) When accommodation is vacated due to the death of an officer, a 
representative of the deceased, and the Administrator of his estate 
or his representative as the case may be, shall be present when the 
inventory is taken. 
 
280. Security of Un-Occupied Premises 
(1) The officer in charge of the Public Works Department at the station, 
the  Regional Coordinating Director or  the  District  Coordinating 

 
154 
 
Director, as  may  be  applicable,  will  inform  the  Police  when the 
accommodation is left unallocated.  
 
(2) The  Regional  or  District  Coordinating  Director will,  nevertheless, be 
held  responsible  for  the  security  of  the  premises while  they  are  not 
allocated. 
 
281. Allocation and Maintenance of Office Accommodation 
Where  the  Ministry  responsible  for  Works  and  Housing  constructs  office 
accommodation,  it  shall  be  responsible for  its allocation  and make 
arrangements for its maintenance. 
 
282. Maintenance of Office Accommodation Constructed by a Department 
(1) Where    a    Ministry    or    Department    constructs its    own    office 
accommodation  in Accra,  or in  an  outstation,  arrangements  may 
be made by the Ministry or Department for the maintenance of the 
building.  
 
(2) In the case of a Regional Coordinating Council or District Assembly, 
allocation     of     accommodation     shall     be     made     by     that 
Administration. 
 
 
283. Cleaning of Offices 
Generally,  arrangements  for  cleaning  offices,  i.e.  sweeping,  dusting,  etc. 
shall   be   the   responsibility   of   the   Ministry   or   Department   using   the 
accommodation. 
 
 

 
155 
 
284. Watchmen 
(1) Watchmen  or  security  guards  shall  be  engaged  to  safeguard  the 
security of public buildings.  
 
(2) The responsibility to safeguard the public building shall be exercised 
by Ministries and Departments in respect of all public buildings. 
 
285. Unauthorized Use of Public Offices and Buildings 
A public office building shall not be used for private or personal purpose 
without  the  prior  approval of  the  Chief  Director  or Head  of  Department 
concerned.  
 
286. Maintenance of Sanitation Around Public Buildings 
Sanitation in and around public buildings and offices shall be maintained 
by the Estate Unit of the Ministry or Department, in collaboration with the 
Environmental Health Department.  
 
 
PART II 
HEALTH AND WELLNESS 
 
287. Classification of Documents on the Health of an Officer 
Documents  relating  to  the  state of  an officer’s health shall  be  treated as 
confidential. 
 
288. Procedure for Reporting Illness 
(1) A staff who is unable to report to work through illness shall inform the 
Chief   Director   or   Head   of   Department through his   immediate 
Supervisor within twenty-four (24) hours of his illness. 

 
156 
 
(2) An  officer suffering  from  ill-health  which  causes  his  absence  from 
duty for more than one (1) day, will be required to furnish the Chief 
Director  or  Head  of  Department with  a  report  from a  Medical 
Officer of an accredited medical facility granting him excuse duty. 
 
(3) All  other  unexcused  absences  will  be  deducted  from  accrued 
leave, and/or attract any appropriate disciplinary action. 
 
289. Medical Subsidy 
(1) Staff  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  access  the  National  Health  Insurance 
Scheme (NHIS) for purposes of medical treatment, if reasonable. 
 
(2) Ministries  and  Departments  shall pay  the  premium for  the  NHIS  for 
an   employee,   one   spouse   and   four   (4)   biological   or   legally 
adopted  children  under eighteen (18)  years of  age  and  up  to 
twenty-three (23) years if they are still schooling. 
 
(3) Ministries  and  Departments  concerned  shall  endeavour  to  pay  fifty 
percent  (50%)  of  the  medical  expenses  for  conditions  not  covered 
by  the  NHIS  certified  by  a  registered  medical  practitioner  in  a 
Government facility for treatment. 
 
(4) Where   the   medical   condition   is not   treatable   by   orthodox 
medicine,   the   institution   shall endeavour   to   pay   the   cost   of 
traditional treatment. 
 
(5) The rates  payable  as  Medical Subsidy shall  be  in  the  accordance 
with prevailing Government policy. 
 

 
157 
 
290. Emergency Treatment While on Duty Abroad 
Subject  to  the  prevailing  Government  policy,  the  Minister  responsible  for 
Health   may   recommend   a   refund   of   medical   expenses   (excluding 
charges  for  personal  maintenance)  recalculated at  Bank  of  Ghana 
exchange rates, incurred by an officer outside Ghana, provided that: 
 
a) the illness was not due to his own negligence or default; 
b) he  has  shown  reasonable  diligence,  expedition  and  economy  in 
obtaining medical attention while he was travelling; 
c) the illness had arisen as a direct result of his travelling abroad; and, 
d) staff  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  always as  a  first  measure obtain 
personal  travel  insurance  when  travelling  abroad  for  personal  or 
official duty. 
 
291. Medical Treatment Abroad 
Where  a Civil  Service  staff falls sick  and there are  no  facilities  in  Ghana 
either   to   diagnose   the   disease   or   for   its proper   treatment,   on   the 
recommendation   of   a   Medical   Board, the officer   may be   sent   for 
treatment abroad at Government expense. 
 
292. Medical Evacuation Recommended by Medical Board 
(1) Officers who,  on  the  recommendations  of  a Medical  Board,  are 
embarked  or flown  as  invalids  and  placed  under  the charge  of  a 
doctor or a nurse must regard themselves as being under the order 
of their medical attendant.  
 
(2) Suitable   arrangements   may   be made   for   doctors or   medical 
attendants to accompany officers flown as  invalids  at the expense 
of the government.  
 

 
158 
 
(3) Failure  to  comply  with  medical  directions  in  such  cases  shall  be 
considered as  constituting sufficient grounds  for the with-holding of 
salary during  any  extension  of  leave  of  absence,  which may  be 
necessary on medical grounds. 
 
293. Ophthalmological Services 
Ophthalmological  services  shall  be provided  to all Civil  Service  staff  in 
accordance with prevailing Government policy. 
 
 
PART III 
TRANSPORT FACILITIES 
 
294.  Travelling Expenses Allowance 
(1) Travelling Expenses Allowances  shall be the actual and reasonable 
expenses incurred in transporting an employee whose is posted and  
his  family  of  one  (1)  spouse  and  not  more  than  four  (4)  children 
under the eighteen (18) years of age as  well as  his  baggage to his 
new location. 
 
(2) Retired employees shall also be paid reasonable expenses incurred 
in transporting his family and dependents to his hometown. 
 
(3) The  rate  payable  as  Travelling  Expenses Allowances  shall  be  in 
accordance with prevailing Government policy. 
 
 
 
 

 
159 
 
295. Kilometric Allowance 
(1) Kilometric  allowance  shall be  paid  to  cover  fuel,  wear  and  tear  of 
the vehicle of a staff of the Civil Service whose work requires the use 
of a vehicle but is requested to use his own vehicle for official trips. 
 
(2) The use  of  the  employee’s  own  vehicle  for  official  trips  must  be 
approved  by  the  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  and  the 
allowance paid shall be in accordance with prevailing Government 
approved rates. 
  
296. Official Travel  
Staff  of  the  Civil  Service,  except  otherwise  exempted,  shall  travel  by 
economy class whilst travelling by rail, sea or air unless a contrary directive 
is given by the Government. 
 
297. Air Travel in Ghana 
A Chief  Director or Head  of  Department  may approve air travel within 
Ghana for  staff  of  the Civil  Service on official  duties in  accordance  with 
prevailing Government policy. 
 
298. Transport for Medical Treatment 
(1)  Subject to the approval of a Chief Director or Head of Department, 
if it is necessary for an officer at an outstation to go to any facility for 
medical  treatment,  he  is  eligible for  the  provision of transport 
between   his station   and   the   town   at   which   he   undergoes 
treatment, in accordance with prevailing Government policy.  
 

 
160 
 
(2)  Where  the  officer  attends medical  treatment  as  an  out-patient  at 
his  station  he  is  not  eligible  to  receive  free  transport between  his 
residence and the place of treatment. 
 
299. Authority to Hire Means of Transport at Government Expenses 
(1)  A  staff  of  the  Civil Service requiring  transport  to  be  provided  at 
public  expense  must  obtain  authority  from  the  Chief  Director  or 
Head of Department. 
(2)  A   Chief Director   or   Head   of   Department   who   authorizes   an 
application to  hire  a  means of  transport shall ensure  that  the 
journey is for the purpose for which such authority may properly be 
given, that the  applicant  is  eligible  for  free  transport,  and  the 
transport requisition  is  in  accordance  with prevailing  Government 
policy. 
 
300. Transport Charges 
A  claim  for refund  of  transport  fares and  freight  rates, at the prevailing 
rates, may be certified by an officer who is authorised to certify travelling 
allowance claims to the Department concerned. 
 
301. Liability for Overpayment of Claims 
An Officer   who   certifies   a   claim shall   be   held   responsible for   any 
overpayment   made as   a   result   of   being inaccurately   assessed   or 
inadequately checked. 
 
302. Certificate of Abnormal Rates 
Where an officer  has been paid  a  rate  in  excess of  normal  rate,  he  must 
substantiate  his  claims  by  a  certificate  signed  by  his  supervisor  to  the 

 
161 
 
effect that  the  rates  claimed  are those  above  the  normal  rates  in  the 
area in question. 
 
 
PART IV 
CANTEEN AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 
 
303. Provision of Canteens and Common Rooms 
(1) As  far  as  practicable,  the Welfare  Committee  of  a  Ministry  or 
Department  may arrange  canteens  to  be  established  in working 
areas where meals, sold at reasonable prices will be served. 
 
(2) Canteen  facilities  shall  normally  be  open  to  members  of  the  Civil 
Service, and their guests etc. 
 
304. Common Rooms with Recreational Facilities 
Where  possible,  common  rooms,  suitably  equipped  with  recreational 
facilities, may be provided. 
 
 
PART V 
BEREAVEMENT  
 
305. Funeral Grant 
(1) In  the  event  of  the  death  of  a  staff  of the  Civil  Service, his  spouse, 
biological  or  legally adopted  child, the  Ministry or  Department 
concerned  shall notify  the  Head of  Civil  Service  on  the  receipt  of 
notification from the family. The organization shall pay funeral grant 
in accordance with prevailing Government policy.  

 
162 
 
 
(2) Application  for  funeral  grants  and  services  shall  be made  to  the 
Ministry responsible for Finance through the deceased officer’s Head of 
Department. 
 
 
PART VI       
LEAVE 
 
306. Authority for Granting Leave 
(1)  Leave  is  granted  by  the  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department 
subject to the exigencies of the Service, unless otherwise stated. The 
Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  may  delegate  this  power  to 
specified officers. Such delegation may state the grades of officers 
in respect of which the power to grant leave may be exercised. 
 
(2)  In  the  case  of  Chief  Directors and  other  critical  staff,  the  Sector 
Minister should approve and the Head of the Civil Service notified. 
 
(3)  All   leave   rates,   whether   annual   or   proportionate,   shall   be 
applicable to both Ghanaian Civil Service staff and their expatriate 
counterparts unless otherwise stated in their letters of appointment. 
 
(4) Request  for  approval to  proceed  on  leave  should be  sought  from 
the Chief Director or Head of Department, at least one (1) month in 
advance before  the  date  on  which  a  staff  of  the  Civil  Service 
proceed on leave. 
 

 
163 
 
(5) Approval  to  proceed  on  leave should  be  granted  at  least  two  (2) 
weeks before an officer proceeds on leave. 
 
307. Spending Leave outside Ghana 
A Ghanaian staff of the Civil Service who wishes to spend his leave at his 
own  expense  outside  Ghana must notify  the Chief  Director  or  Head  of 
Department,  prior  to  his  departure.  In  all  cases,  the  Head  of  the  Civil 
Service shall be notified. 
 
308. Interruption of Leave 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  may  be  required  either  by  his  Chief 
Director  or  Head  of  Department to  interrupt  his  leave  to  discharge 
any duty or to undertake any course of instruction during his leave. 
(2) Where the   officer is required to   interrupt his   leave   in   the 
circumstances  specified  above, he shall  not  forfeit  the  right  to  the 
remainder  of  the  leave but shall  take  the  leave any  time after  the 
interruption  with  the  approval  of the  Chief  Director  or Head  of 
Department. 
 
(3) Where a  staff  of  the  Civil  Service is  required to  interrupt his  annual 
leave in the circumstances stated above, Management shall make 
up  to the officer any  reasonable  expense  incurred  on  account  of 
the interruption and resumption of the leave by the officer. 
 
309. Eligibility for Leave 
(1) Unless  otherwise  specified  in  the  contract,  a  staff  of  the  Civil  service  is 
eligible  for  vacation  leave,  which  may be  taken  in  one  or  more  spells 
at  any  time  in  the  leave  year  for  the  appropriate  number  of  working 
days excluding Saturdays, Sundays and Public Holidays. 

 
164 
 
(2) If  the  officer  is  abroad  either  on  course,  duty  or  conference, the Chief 
Director  or  Head  of  Department  may  grant  him  annual  leave  to be 
spent there,   provided   that   no   additional   expenditure   is   thereby 
incurred  on  passages or  allowances  and  provided  further  that  any 
report  which  the  officer  concerned  is  required  to  submit  will  not  be 
unduly delayed. 
 
310. Leave Calculation 
(1)  In calculating the leave, the following rules shall apply. 
(a) Proportionate  leave in  respect  of  any  period  of service  as 
defined in paragraph b) below, of less than a full leave year, 
may  be  granted for the  number completed  months’ service. 
No  period  of  service  of  less  than one  month  will  count  for 
proportionate leave. 
 
(b) The  term  “Leave Year”  means  the  calendar   year, and 
“Completed Months Service” means a period of continuous 
service   of   one   month   reckoned   in   days   (e.g.   from   14
th
 
February to 13
th
 March inclusive). 
 
(c) Service for the purpose of this Instruction shall exclude periods    
of: 
i. leave without pay; 
ii. sick leave in excess of twenty-eight (28) days in a leave 
year, 
iii. maternity leave; 
iv. interdiction from duty on disciplinary charges; 
v. absence from duty without permission; and, 

 
165 
 
vi. special   leave   on   full   or   half   salary   granted   under 
Administrative Instruction 329.  
 
(d) Where an  officer  has  spent  more  than  the  proportionate 
leave  for  which  he  is  eligible, the  number  of excess  days 
spent   shall   be deducted   from his   annual   leave   for   the 
subsequent  leave  year;  irrespective  of  whether  he  will  be 
eligible  for full  or  proportionate  annual leave.  Where  an 
officer leaves the Service when he has not earned enough to 
affect  the  excess  leave,  he  shall  be  required  to refund  the 
salary drawn in respect of the excess days. 
 
(e) Where  the  leave  rate  changes  during  a  leave year,  the 
amount  of  leave for  which  the  officer  will  be  eligible  during 
that  leave  year  will  be  the  total  of  the  proportionate  leave 
appropriate  to a  completed month’s  service  at  the  higher 
rate as granted under these Administrative Instructions. 
 
(2) For  the purpose  of  this  calculation  only,  provided  the  service  is 
continuous,  any  part  of  a  month,  to  which  the  higher  leave  rate 
applies will count as a completed month at that rate 
. 
311. Accumulation or Deferment of Leave 
(1)  A staff of the Civil Service may be allowed to accumulate leave for 
two (2) years only with the special authority of the Chief Director or 
Head of Department.  
 
(2) Every officer should take his leave at regular intervals.  
 

 
166 
 
(3) Permission to defer leave will only be granted if the Chief Director or 
Head of  Department  is  satisfied  that  the  circumstances  for  such  a 
dispensation have merit.  
 
(4) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  may  not  return  to duty  before  the  expiry 
of  his  authorized  leave  without  the  approval  of  the  Chief  Director 
or Head of Department. 
 
312. Leave Address 
Before  going  on leave,  a  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  notify in  writing  his 
leave  address (email,  postal  and  residential) to  the  officer  in  charge of 
human resource matters. 
 
313. Posting on Return from Leave 
(1)  A Chief Director or Head of Department is responsible for informing 
a staff of the Civil Service before he goes on leave, of his posting on 
resumption of duty, whenever it is necessary to do so. 
 
(2) A  change  in  the  proposed  posting  shall  be  notified  to  him  by  his 
Chief Director or Head of Department during his leave. 
 
(3) If  an  officer  of  the  General  Class  is  to  be  posted  to  a  different 
Department on the expiry of his leave, he should be so informed by 
the  Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  after  the  latter  has 
consulted the relieving and receiving Departments. 
 
314. Rules for Preparation for Annual Leave Roster 
(1)  It is the responsibility of Chief Directors and Heads of Department to 
ensure the preparation and maintenance of an annual leave roster 

 
167 
 
for the Ministry or Department before the end of the leave year for 
the ensuing year. 
 
(2)  Chief  Directors  and  Heads  of  Department  shall  notify all  officers  in 
their  Ministries  and  Departments  by second  week  of January  when 
they will proceed on leave. 
 
315. Application for Annual Leave 
(1)  A staff of the Civil Service who, is at the beginning of the leave year 
and  whose  application  has  not  received  notification  by  the  31
st
 
March  may  apply  to  his  Chief Director or  Head  of  Department 
before 1
st
 July indicating when he wants to proceed on leave. 
 
(2)  A  staff  of the  Service  who  joins  the  Service  during  the  leave  year 
may apply to his Chief Director or Head of Department for leave in 
time  for  him  to  be  granted  all the  leave  for  which  he  is  eligible 
before the end of the leave year. Such application shall, if possible, 
be made one (1) month before the officer proceeds on the leave. 
 
316. Leave and Handing-over Notes 
(1)  It  shall  be  mandatory  for  all  staff  of  the Civil  Service to  provide 
handing-over notes before proceeding on any form of leave. 
 
(2)  In   furtherance   of (1) above,   the   handing-over   notes   shall   be 
prepared as recommended in Administrative Instruction 190.  
 
 
 
 

 
168 
 
PART VII 
CASUAL LEAVE 
317. Eligibility for Casual Leave 
(1)  A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  may apply  in  writing  for  casual  leave  to 
enable him to attend to his urgent personal matters. 
 
(2) No casual leave may be granted to an officer unless he has already 
taken all the leave for which he is eligible. 
 
318. Frequency of Casual Leave 
On  being  satisfied  that the  application  is  made  on  genuine  grounds, a 
Chief  Director  or Head  of  Department  or  other  person  authorized  may, 
subject to Administrative  Instruction 317 grant  the  person  up  to ten (10) 
working days casual leave in one calendar year. This may be taken in one 
or more spells. 
 
319. Extension of Casual Leave 
In  exceptional circumstances,  casual  leave  may  be  extended  beyond 
the  maximum  period  of  10  days.  Such  an  extension  shall  be  deducted 
from the annual leave for the subsequent year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
169 
 
PART VIII 
SICK LEAVE 
 
320. Grant of Sick Leave 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service is entitled to a paid sick leave.  
 
(2) An  officer  shall notify his supervisor, as  soon  as  practicable, if he  is 
unable to attend work due to illness or injury. The officer shall submit 
to  the Chief  Director  or  the  Head  of Department a  medical  report 
duly signed by a Medical Officer of an accredited health facility. 
 
(3) A staff  of  the  Civil  Service who  does  not  attend  work  because  of 
illness  but  fails  to  submit the  report  shall  be  considered  as  absent 
from work and is subject to appropriate sanctions. 
 
(4) A  public  servant who  has  been  sick  for  a period  of  up  to  one  (1) 
year  shall be  paid  the  full  salary  subject  to  periodic  review  and 
recommendation by an accredited medical practitioner.  
 
(5) At  the  end  of  the  one  (1)  year  period,  if  the  medical practitioner 
certifies  that  further  absence  of  duty  is  necessary,  the  officer shall 
be  granted  another  period  of  sick  leave  not  exceeding  one  (1) 
year on half salary.  
(6) Two (2) months  before  the  end  of  the  second  year,  the Ministry  or 
Department shall inform  the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service, who  shall 
request the  Ministry  of  Health  to constitute a  medical  board  to 
evaluate the condition of the officer.  
 

 
170 
 
(7) If   the   board   finds   that the   officer   is not fit   to   work,   it   shall 
recommend to the Head of the Civil Service for the discharge of the 
officer at the end of the second year. 
 
(8) Payment  of  salary  to  the  officer shall  cease  immediately  after his 
discharge form the Civil Service. 
 
 
PART IX 
MATERNITY AND PATERNITY LEAVE 
 
321. Eligibility for Maternity Leave 
(1)    A  female  staff  of  the  Service,  on  becoming pregnant,  may  be 
granted her annual leave for which she is eligible and in addition a 
maximum of twelve (12) weeks leave.  
 
(2) Out  of  this  leave, not  more  than four (4) weeks  shall,  if  possible  be 
taken before confinement, on production of a certificate signed by 
a Medical Officer of an accredited health facility or a Midwife of an 
accredited Maternity Home  stating  that  the  confinement  may  be 
expected  to  take  place  four (4) weeks  after  the  date of  the 
certificate. 
 
(3) As much as practicable, the leave period after delivery shall not be 
less than three (3) months. 
 
(4) The period of maternity leave may be extended for at least two (2) 
additional  weeks  where the confinement  is  abnormal  or  where  in 

 
171 
 
the  course  of  the  same confinement,  two  (2)  or  more  babies  are 
born. 
 
(5) A female staff of the Civil Service, who legally adopts a child under 
six  (6)  months  old, shall  be  granted six (6)  weeks  in  addition to  her 
annual leave to nurse the baby. 
 
(6)     The Administrative Instructions under this part apply to all female  
    staff of the Civil Service 
 
322. Further Interpretation of Maternity Leave 
Maternity  leave  granted under Administrative  Instruction 321 shall  be 
regarded as absence on the ground of ill-health. 
 
323. Conditional Interpretation of Maternity Leave 
(1) Maternity leave shall count towards increment and retiring awards.  
 
(2) A female staff of the Service returning to duty after maternity leave, 
will  be  given  the  opportunity  to  go  home  each  day  after six  (6) 
hours of duty, for a maximum of nine (9) months to nurse her baby. 
 
324. Paternity Leave 
A male staff of the Civil Service, on production of medical report issued by 
a  qualified  Medical  Practitioner  or  a  Midwife  indicating the  expected 
date of confinement of his wife is entitled to a period of paternity leave of 
a maximum of ten (10) working days, in addition to any period of annual 
leave to which that officer is entitled.  
 
 

 
172 
 
PART X 
COMPASSIONATE LEAVE 
 
325. Compassionate Leave 
(1) Under special circumstances, for example in the case of a tragedy 
involving  a  staff  of  the Service  or  the  immediate family (father, 
mother,  spouse,  children  and  ward),  the  officer  may  be  granted 
compassionate  leave  not  exceeding  ten  working  days and  that 
compassionate leave shall not be deducted from annual leave. 
 
(2) Compassionate leave shall not be accumulated from year to year. 
If it is found that an officer gave false information in an application 
for compassionate leave, that officer shall be liable to the forfeiture 
of  pay  for  the  period  during  which  the compassionate leave  was 
granted.    
 
 
PART XI 
LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
 
326. Leave of Absence 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  may  request  and  be  granted  leave  of 
absence for personal or professional reasons. Among these are, to: 
 
 a) undertake a professional assignment; 
 b)  welcome a new child into the family; or 
 c) embark on an extended trip. 
 
(2) Leave  of  absence  up  to  a  maximum  of  two  (2)  years  may  be 
approved for a staff of the Service where the officer necessary.  

 
173 
 
(3) However,   under   special circumstances, longer   period   may   be 
approved. On approval of the leave, the Chief Director or Head of 
Department shall  be  requested  to  initiate  the  necessary  steps  to 
stop or freeze the payment of salary of the staff of the Civil Service.  
 
(4) After leave  of  absence,  that  officer  can  only  be  reappointed 
subject to  availability  of  vacancy.  A staff  of  the  Civil  Service on 
leave of absence who is reappointed shall serve a minimum of four 
(4)   years   on   the   return   to post before   becoming   eligible   for 
consideration  for  another leave  of  absence  or  study  leave with  or 
without pay. 
 
 
PART XII 
DISEMBARKATION LEAVE 
 
327. Disembarkation Leave 
(1)       A staff of the Service who returns from abroad to resume duty after   
a  course of  study or  duty  tour  shall  be  granted  disembarkation 
leave. The effective date of the disembarkation leave shall be from 
the day following the date of disembarkation.  
 
(2)      The staff of the Service shall communicate the notice of arrival to  
the Chief  Director  or Head of  Department the  next  day  after 
disembarkation. 
 
 
 
 

 
174 
 
(3)     A staff of the Civil Service shall be entitled to disembarkation leave   
as follows:  
(a) two (2) working days (for a period of absence of up to six (6) 
months); 
(b) ten  (10)  working  days (for  a  period  of absence above  six  (6) 
months) 
 
 
PART XII 
EXAMINATION LEAVE 
 
328. Examination Leave 
(1) A staff  of the  Service shall  be  granted  leave,  on  application,  to 
enable  the  officer sit  for  an  examination.  The  examination  leave 
shall not exceed ten (10) working days and is additional to the staff 
of the Service’s annual leave entitlement. 
  
(2) The following conditions apply for the grant of examination leave. 
(a) the   programme   of   study   must   have  been   approved   by 
Management; and, 
(b) the officer shall attach a copy of the official examination time 
table    to    the    application    for    examination    leave    to 
Management   at   least   five (5)   working   days   before the 
commencement of the examinations. 
 
(3) If  the  permissible  ten  (10) days examination  leave  is  insufficient  to 
cover  the  duration  of  the examinations  as  provided  for in  the 
examination  time  table,  the staff  of  the  Service may  apply  for 

 
175 
 
annual leave or for casual leave in the event that the annual leave 
is exhausted.  
 
(4) If the officer exhausted both the casual leave and annual leave, he 
may   apply   for   additional   days. The   additional   days shall   be 
deducted from the leave entitlements of the officer for the ensuing 
year. 
 
329. Terms of Special Leave Dispensation 
Leave considered  to  be  in  the  public  interest,  other  than annual  leave, 
casual  leave and  maternity  leave  may  be  granted  by  the  Head  of  Civil 
Service on full salary. 
 
330. Leave Conditions for Non-Ghanaians 
(1)  A  non-Ghanaian  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  recruited  from  outside 
Ghana shall have his leave conditions stated in his terms of contract 
of employment by the Appointing Authority. 
 
(2) The following principles shall, however, apply to non-Ghanaian staff 
of the Service: 
 
 
(a) travel by economy class of air, rail, or sea transport; 
(b) eligible  for  travel  once every three (3) years  at  Government 
expense on his annual leave; and, 
(c) spouse  and two (2) children  are  entitled  to  free  transport,  to 
and from leave, once every three (3) years. 
 
 
 
 

 
176 
 
PART XIV 
STUDY LEAVE 
 
331. Types of Study Leave 
(1) Study leave is a facility that is provided to a staff of the Civil Service 
to enable him undertake an approved course of study or research 
in a local or overseas training institution. This is to enable the officer 
keep  abreast with current  trends  and  broaden  the  scope  and 
experiences   of   the Civil   Service   staff for the   benefit   of the 
organisation.  
 
(2) There are two (2) types of study leave. 
(a)  Study Leave with Pay 
(b)  Study Leave without Pay 
 
332. Study Leave with Pay 
(1) A staff  of  the  Civil  Service  who  is  granted study  leave  with pay  for 
courses  in  local  or  overseas  educational institutions,  while  on  the 
course,   shall   be entitled   to   salary   and   other   benefits   and 
entitlements in accordance with prevailing Government policy. 
(2) The  expenses  in  connection  with  passage  and  tuition  fees  will  be 
borne  by  Government  in  cases  where  these  cannot  be  met  from 
Technical Assistance Funds from the Training Plan.  
 
(3) The authority for approving the grant of study leave with pay is the 
Civil Service Council. 
 
 
 

 
177 
 
333. Eligibility for Study Leave with Pay 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service may  be granted  study  leave  with pay, if 
he: 
 
(a) is a permanent staff; 
(b) has been confirmed in the appointment; 
(c) has  served  the Civil  Service for  a  period  of  not  less  than four 
(4) continuous years; and, 
(d) has completed serving a previous bond where applicable; 
 
(2) The  requirement in  (c),  above, may  be  waived  in  the  case  of 
beneficiaries   of   donor-sponsored   programmes, scholarship   or 
fellowship    awarded    by    the    Ghana    Government    or    foreign 
organisations through fair and transparent selection processes. 
 
(3) In  determining  eligibility for study  leave  with  pay,  preference  shall 
be  given  to  a Civil  Service  staff who  is  a  first-time  applicant  over 
previous beneficiaries. 
 
334. Procedure for the Grant of Study Leave with Pay  
The following procedure shall apply for the grant of Study Leave with Pay.  
(a) A Civil  Service  staff shall  apply  for  the  grant  of  study  leave 
with the following supporting documents: 
 
(i) admission letter for the course; 
(ii) first appointment letter; 
(iii) last promotion letter, if necessary; and, 
(iv) recent pay slip. 
 

 
178 
 
(b) A statement of the objectives and scope of the course and its 
relevance to the mandate of the Service and the duties and 
responsibilities of the applicant. 
(c) the Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department shall  thoroughly 
examine  the  application in the  first  instance  and forward  it 
with   comments   to   the Head   of   the Civil   Service for 
consideration and the comments shall cover the following: 
 
(i) applicant’s status (whether confirmed or not); 
(ii) length of service; 
(iii) place, content and duration of the course;  
(iv) relevance  of  the  course  to  the applicant’s work  and   
the core mandate of the Ministry or Department; 
(v) details of courses attended by applicant within the last 
one (1) year; 
(vi) cost of    programme and    source of    funding    for 
participation in the course; 
(vii) details  of  applicant’s  outstanding financial  or other 
obligations   to   the organisation   and  Government,   if 
applicable; 
(viii) whether  there  is a  pending disciplinary  case  against 
the applicant; and, 
(ix) an   undertaking   by   the   applicant   to   successfully 
complete the course and return to the Civil Service 
 
(d) The  application  shall  be  forwarded  to Office  of the  Head  of 
the  Civil  Service  for  consideration  and approval at least  one 
(1) month before the commencement date of the course. 
 

 
179 
 
(e) The applicant shall prepare and submit handing-over notes to 
a designated public servant. 
 
335. Conditions for the Grant of Study Leave with Pay  
(1) Study leave with pay for courses to be undertaken abroad may be 
approved only if the course of study is not locally available.  
 
(2) This  requirement  may  be  waived in  the  case  of  beneficiaries  of 
donor-sponsored programmes or scholarship or fellowship awarded 
by  the  Ghana  Government or  foreign  organisations  through  a  fair 
and transparent selection process.  
 
(3) The grant of Study Leave with Pay is subject to the following; 
(a) signing  of  a  bonding  agreement by the employer  and the 
applicant; 
(b) approved  course  shall  not  be  changed  without  the  written 
permission of the organization; 
(c) beneficiary shall not, on completion of the approved course, 
pursue an additional course of study without explicit approval 
from the Civil Service Council; 
(d) the  facility  will  be  enjoyed  for  the  normal  duration  of  the 
course   and   the continued   enjoyment   of the   facility   is 
dependent  on  the  beneficiary’s  satisfactory  performance 
while on the course; 
(e) the  beneficiary  shall  cause to  be transmitted by  the  training 
institution  to  the  sponsoring  organisation,  semester  reports on 
the  performance  of  the  beneficiary  during  the  course  of  the 
training; 

 
180 
 
(f) the beneficiary  shall  not  modify  the  duration  of  the  course 
without the written permission of the Head of the Civil Service; 
(g) in the event of breach of the conditions spelt out above, the 
promotion of the  beneficiary  shall be  put  on  hold  for  the 
number of years that the beneficiary was on the study leave, 
and in addition, a certificate  acquired  by the  beneficiary  in 
the  event of  a  change  in  course  shall  not  be  recognised  by 
the Civil Service; and, 
(h) the period  of Study Leave  with Pay  is  leave-consuming  and 
not leave-earning that is, no leave credits are earned for the 
period of the study leave. 
 
336. Study Leave without Pay  
(1) Study  leave  without  pay  shall  be  granted  as  an  alternative  to 
resignation, in  a situation  where  study  leave  with  pay  cannot  be 
granted.  
 
(2) The grant of study leave without pay is subject to the following: 
 
(a) the  authority  for approving the grant of  study leave  without 
pay is the Head of the Civil Service; 
(b) the period of study leave without pay is leave-consuming and 
not leave-earning, that is, no leave credits are earned for the 
period of the study leave without pay;  
(c) a qualification acquired by the officer shall not automatically 
qualify him for  promotion  and  after the  study  leave  without 
pay; and, 
(d) the  officer can only be  reappointed subject  to  availability  of 
vacancy. 

 
181 
 
CHAPTER 10: MONTHLY-RATED EMPLOYEE 
 
337. General Conditions of Service 
(1) Subject to special   conditions   imposed   at   the   time   of   the 
engagement  of  a monthly-rated  employee  may be  subject  to 
posting  from  the  place  of  engagement  to  another  post  in  the  Civil 
Service. 
 
(2) Full  payment  shall  be  made  for  days  on  which  a  worker  attends 
work  as  usual  irrespective  of  whether  wet  weather  prevents  him 
from  carrying out  his  normal  duties  and irrespective  of  whether it  is 
possible to arrange some alternative work for him on these days. 
 
338. Leave 
(1) A   monthly-rated   female   officer   qualifies for maternity   leave 
provided she has been at post continuously for a period of not less 
than six (6) months. 
 
(2)  A  monthly-rated  employee with more than one year’s continuous 
and satisfactory service may be granted casual leave to attend to 
urgent personal matters. 
 
(3) Casual  leave  may  not  be  granted  to  a  monthly-rated  employee 
unless he has already taken all leave entitlements. 
 
(4) Subject to sub-paragraph (1) a Chief Director, Head of Department 
or  any  other  authorized  officer  may  grant  the  employee  up  to  ten 
(10)  days  casual leave  in  every  period  of  one (1)  year  in  one  or 

 
182 
 
more  spells on  being  satisfied  that  the  application  for  the  casual 
leave is genuine. 
 
(5) In   exceptional   circumstances,   casual  leave   may   be   extended 
beyond the maximum period to which an officer is entitled. Such an 
extension shall be deducted from the annual leave of the officer for 
subsequent leave year. 
 
339. Petition by Monthly-Rated Employee 
A petition from a monthly- rated employee shall be submitted through the 
local Head of Department. 
 
340. Laying Off 
Persons engaged for a temporary purpose shall be clearly informed when 
projects for which they are engaged have been completed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
183 
 
CHAPTER 11: EXIT FROM THE CIVIL SERVICE 
PART 1 
LEAVING THE CIVIL SERVICE 
 
341. Circumstances of Leaving the Service 
A  staff  of the Civil  Service  may  leave  the  Civil  Service  under  any  of  the 
following circumstances: 
 
(a) resignation; 
(b) vacation of post; 
(c) premature retirement; 
(d) retirement under medical grounds; 
(e) voluntary retirement after the age of 45; 
(f) compulsory retirement at the age of 60; and,  
(g) dismissal or termination (removal), where a staff of the Civil Service is 
separated on disciplinary grounds. 
 
 
PART II 
RESIGNATION 
 
342. Notice of Resignation 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service who wishes to resign shall serve notice of 
his intention on the Head of Department, or a person authorized by 
him, in accordance with notice clause in his appointment letter. 
 
(2) The Head of the Civil Service may, however, waive the requirement 
of notice in whole or in part if he considers it appropriate to do so. 
 
 

 
184 
 
343. Resignation Without Notice 
(1) A  staff  of  the Civil  Service  who leaves  his  post without  giving  the 
required notice  will  be  regarded as  having vacated  his  post  with 
effect  from the  date  on  which  he  ceases  to  attend  duty,  and  will 
not  be  granted  any retiring benefits,  other than  his  accumulations 
under the Social Security Scheme. 
 
(2) In the case of a “non-Ghanaian”, the officer will  not  be granted 
assistance  towards the cost of passage. He will also forfeit the right 
to any gratuity or award for which he would, otherwise, have been 
eligible,  other  than  his accumulations  under  the  Social  Security 
Scheme. 
 
(3) Where the Head  of  the  Civil  Service accepts  a  resignation,  the 
Chief  Director  or  Head  of  Department  shall report  the  effective 
date to  the  Controller  and  Accountant-General and the  Auditor-
General. 
 
344. Withholding Acceptance on Criminal or Disciplinary Proceedings 
Acceptance shall be withheld where criminal or disciplinary proceedings 
have been,  or  are  about  to  be  instituted against  a  staff  of the  Civil 
Service who wishes to resign from the Service until the proceedings have 
been completed. 
 
345. Resignation of Bonded Officers 
A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  who  is  bonded  to  serve  the  Government  for  a 
stated  period  and  who  wishes  to  resign  from  the Civil  Service  before  the 
expiry  of  the  bond shall  apply  through the  Chief  Director or  Head  of 
Department, who   shall review   the   request and   make   necessary 

 
185 
 
recommendations  to  the  Head  of  Civil  Service  for  consideration  and 
approval to estreat the bond. 
 
 
PART III 
DISMISSAL AND TERMINATION (REMOVAL) 
 
346. Effects of Dismissal 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service, who is dismissed, leaves the Service with 
effect  from  the  date  of  dismissal,  and  shall  forfeit  all  claims  to 
pension,   annual   allowances,   gratuity   or other   retiring   awards 
payable in accordance with prevailing Government policy.  
 
(2) When  a  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  is  dismissed, the  Chief Director  or 
Head of Department shall report the effective date to the Controller 
and Accountant-General and the Auditor –General. 
 
347. Effects of Termination or Removal 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service whose appointment is terminated shall be 
paid  a  full  or  a reduced  award  as  the  approving  authority  may 
determine.  
  
(2) When  the  appointment  of  a  staff  of  the  Civil Service  is  terminated, 
the Chief Director or Head of Department shall report the effective 
date  to  the  Controller  and  Accountant-General  and  the  Auditor –
General. 
 
 
 

 
186 
 
PART IV 
RETIREMENT 
 
348. Retirement 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service holding a post, otherwise than on limited 
engagement terms, may retire from the Service at any time after he 
has attained the age of forty-five (45). 
 
(2) Premature  retirement  is  retirement  before  the  age  45  years  and 
includes  dismissal,  removal,  retirement  for  medical  reasons  and 
retirement  on  grounds  of  marriage  for  women  officers,  with the 
consent of Head of Civil Service. 
 
(3) The  Head  of  Civil  Service  shall  issue  a Certificate  of Service,  if  the 
service of the officer has been satisfactory. 
 
349. Special Testimonial on Conduct to Be Given in Special Circumstances 
No  other  testimonial  on conduct may be  given  to  a  staff  of  the  Civil 
Service  whether  serving  or  on  retirement,  except  in  cases where  special 
permission is given by the Head of the Civil Service. 
 
350. Compulsory Retirement 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service holding a post, otherwise than on limited 
engagement,  shall  retire  from  the  Service  on  attaining  the  age  of 
sixty (60). 
 
(2) An  Appointing  Authority  may  discharge  an officer  on  satisfactory 
evidence that he has attained the age of sixty (60).  
 

 
187 
 
351. Voluntary Retirement 
(1) A  staff  of  the  Civil Service  who wishes to  retire  voluntarily  after 
attaining  the  age  of  45,  shall  serve  notice  to  Head  of  the  Civil 
Service  at  least  three (3)  months  before  the  date  on  which  he 
wishes  to  retire, provided that  the  requirement  of  notice  may  be 
waived, in whole or in part, at the discretion of the Head of the Civil 
Service.  
 
(2) The  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  apply to the  Head  of  the  Civil 
Service through his Ministry together with a statement of his reasons 
for wishing to retire prematurely. 
 
(3) The Chief Director, after consultation with the Head of Department, 
shall forward the application together with recommendations to the 
Head of the Civil Service. 
 
(4) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  aged  45  or  more,  who applies  for  and  is 
granted permission to retire voluntarily, shall be paid any retirement 
benefit  due  him, whether  or  not  he  has  taken  up  a  post  with  the 
United Nations or other approved International body. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
188 
 
PART V 
RETIREMENT AWARD 
 
352. Retirement Award 
(1) A staff of the Civil Service may be entitled to terminal awards when 
he: 
 
(a) retires compulsorily on reaching the age of 60; 
(b) retires voluntarily at the voluntary retiring age; 
(c)      retires prematurely; 
  (d) retires on medical grounds; and,  
  (e) retires on grounds of invalidity  
 
(2) Six  (6) months before a staff of the Civil Service is due  to reach the 
age of 60, or in the case of an officer who seeks permission to retire 
voluntarily, the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  consider  whether  or 
not the service of the officer has been satisfactory. 
 
(3) If  the  service  of  the  officer has  been  satisfactory,  the  Head  of  the 
Civil  Service  shall  issue  a  certificate  accordingly, and  approve  the 
grant of the retiring award subject to computation and verification 
by the Accountant-General and Auditor-General, respectively. 
 
(4) If  the  approving authority  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  service  of  the 
officer  has  not  been  satisfactory  and  considers  that  the  officer’s 
retiring  award  should  be  withheld  in whole  or  in  part,  the  Head  of 
Civil Service shall be informed of the matter. 
 
(5) A staff  of  the  Civil Service who  is  not  satisfied  with  any  decision 
taken, may petition the Head of Civil Service. 

 
189 
 
353. Gratuities for Officers Appointed on Limited Engagement Terms 
An  expatriate  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  on  limited  engagement  terms, 
subject to the terms of his  contract, may be eligible to receive a gratuity 
in accordance with prevailing Government policy, if he is above the age 
of 60, or if he does not contribute to the SSNIT.    
 
354. When Gratuity Is Payable 
In the case of an overseas officer serving on an overseas tour contract, a 
gratuity  may  be  payable  on  the  satisfactory  completion  of  the  period  of 
the tour in accordance with prevailing Government policy.   
 
355. Retirement Awards other than Gratuities 
Retirement awards and other gratuities shall be computed in accordance 
with prevailing Government Policy. 
 
356. Retirement on Medical Grounds 
The authority for declaring that a staff of the Civil Service is incapable, by 
reason  of infirmity  of  body  or  mind,  of  discharging  the  duties  of his  post 
shall  be  the  Head  of the  Civil  Service  based  on  recommendations  of a 
medical board through the Ministry of Health. 
 
357. Invalidity and Discharge of Staff of the Civil Service  
A staff of the Civil Service shall be discharged or declared invalidated on 
the grounds that he is physically incapable of performing the duties, if the 
invalidation has been certified by a medical board through the Ministry of 
Health. 
 
 
 

 
190 
 
358. Special Cases 
(1) Applications may  be  submitted  to  the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  by 
an officer whose terminal awards cannot be determined under any 
of these Regulations. 
 
(2) The  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  shall  make  recommendations  to the 
Minister of Finance, who shall determine the award to be paid. 
 
359. Death Gratuity or Benefit                
(1)  On  the  death  of  a  staff  of  the Civil Service, funeral  grant shall  be 
paid in accordance with prevailing Government policy. 
 
(2) Funeral Grant shall be paid to the: 
 
a) nominated relative or relatives; and, 
b) Administrator of his Estate, where there are no nominations. 
 
(3) When the gratuity is paid to the Administrator, the Chief Director or 
Head  of  Department  shall  inform  the  Administrator  of  the  names 
and  addresses  of  the  deceased officer’s next of kin and  shall  give 
details of any other sum payable to or due from the estate. 
 
360. Debts to Government on Leaving the Service 
When a staff   of   the   Civil   Service leaves   the   Service   under   of   any 
circumstances,  the Chief  Director  or Head of  Department  shall ascertain 
the  total  sum  owed  by  him  to  Government  and this  shall  be  recovered 
from his terminal entitlements. 
 
 
 

 
191 
 
PART VI 
PAYMENT OF PENSION 
 
361. Procedure for Payment of Pension 
Payment  of  pension to  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  who have  contributed to 
the   Social Security   and National Insurance Trust and   other   Pension 
Schemes,  and  are  due  for  retirement, shall  be  in accordance  with  the 
procedure  in  the  National  Pensions  Act,  2008,  (Act  766)  as  amended  by 
Act 883, of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
192 
 
CHAPTER I2: MISCELLANEOUS 
PART I 
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION  
 
362. Dissemination of Public Financial Management Regulations 
All  staff of  the Civil Service  are  expected  to  be  fully  conversant  with  the 
provisions  of the  following  laws  and  legislations  that are  relevant  to  the 
efficient performance of their duties: 
 
a) Public Financial Management Act, 2016 (921); 
b) Public Financial Management Regulations, 2019 (LI 2378); 
c) Public Procurement  Act,  2003  (Act  663)  as  amended in  2016  (Act 
914); 
d) Internal Audit Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658); and, 
e) Ghana Internal Revenue Authority Act, 2009 (Act 791). 
  
PART II 
FOREIGN AID 
 
363. Definition of Foreign Aid 
Foreign Aid  comprises  technical  and financial  assistance  received  from 
other countries or international agencies. The terms and conditions under 
which the aid is received are normally embodied in the agreements. 
 
364. Financial Assistance 
Financial assistance comprises programme and project loans, commodity  
loans and grants. 
 
 
 

 
193 
 
365. Technical Assistance 
Technical assistance   includes   the   provision   of   consultants,   advisers, 
fellowship   and   equipment   for   training   and   field   research, absolutely 
relevant to be economic and social development of Ghana. 
 
366. Procedure for Seeking Foreign Technical/Financial Assistance 
Requests for foreign technical and financial assistance as well as offers of 
foreign   aid,   shall   be   channeled   through   the   International   Economic 
Relations   Division   of   the Ministry   of   Finance   which   is responsible   for 
coordinating and processing all foreign aid.  
 
367. Clearance of Foreign Aid with Government 
No offer of foreign aid may be accepted and no Foreign Aid agreements 
may   be   signed   without   the   prior   approval of the Government, 
represented by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
PART III 
PROTECTIVE CLOTHINGS AND CAMP EQUIPMENT 
 
368. Eligibility for Protective Cloth and Camp Equipment 
Whenever  practicable,  Management  of Civil  Service  organisations shall 
ensure  that  staff are supplied  with  protective  clothing  when  it is  required 
for  purposes  of  protection  in  the  course  of their work.    For  field  officers, 
adequate camp equipment and clothing shall be provided. 
   
 
 
 

 
194 
 
 PART IV 
INSURANCE 
 
369. Private Property 
(1) A staff of  the  Civil  Service may  not claim  compensation  from 
Government  in  respect  of  losses  or  damage  to  private property  in 
circumstances   where   the   loss   could   have   been covered   by 
insurance. 
 
(2) Where insurance   is   impracticable,   the   Government may   grant 
compensation, subject to the following conditions: 
 
(a) no  property will  be  considered  which  is  not,  at  the  time  and 
place  in  question,  actually  or  conveniently  necessary  for the 
discharge  of  duties  and  the  maintenance  of  the  position  of 
the officer; 
(b) only a part of the declared value of the property lost will, as a 
rule be granted; and, 
(c) no claim will be admitted under this Instruction on account of 
loss   of money   involved   in   the   private   property   of   the 
individual. 
 
(3) officers travelling by  air will not be insured at Government expense 
but  are at liberty  to  insure  themselves  or  their  families  by  private 
arrangement. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
195 
 
PART V 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS  
 
370. Rules for Patents, Inventions and Copyrights 
The grant of patents for inventions and creative work by officers in the Civil 
Service is  governed  by  the  rules  set  out  in the Administrative  Instructions 
371 below. 
 
371. Conditions for Patenting of Inventions/Archives 
A staff of the Civil Service, who has made an invention or creative work: 
  
(a) may patent it at his own expense; or, 
(b) shall, at the expense of Government, if so required by the Attorney-
General and  the  Minister  for  Justice,  lodge an application  for 
provisional protection; and,  
(c) shall  at  the  same  time  send  a  copy  of the  application  through  the 
Chief Director or Head Department. 
 
372. Amount for an Award 
In determining   the   amount for an   award, or   for   the   share of   any 
commercial proceeds reserved to the Government, or allowed the officer 
under Administrative  Instruction 371, all reasonable  expenses incurred by 
the applicant   in   connection with the invention   shall   be   taken   into 
account. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
196 
 
PART VI 
NEGOTIATING MACHINERY 
 
373. Negotiations on Terms and Conditions of Service 
(1)  The  terms  and  conditions  of  service,  payment  of  allowances  and 
enjoyment  of  privileges as  pertain  to  categories  of  staff  of  the  Civil 
Service  shall  be  negotiated  between the  Fair  Wages  and Salaries 
Commission, the Ministries of Employment and Labour Relations and 
Finance,  on  the  part  of  Government,  and  Organised  Labour for 
public Sector Employees including staff of the Civil Service.   
 
(2) The  Forum  for  negotiating these  conditions  of  service shall  be  the 
Public  Sector  Joint  Standing  Negotiation  Committee  which  is  co-
chaired  by  the  Fair Wages  and  Salaries  Commission  and  the  Trade 
Unions Congress. 

 
197 
 
PART VII 
OATHS 
 
374. Oath to be Sworn by Staff of the Civil Service 
(1)  Persons  recruited  into  the  Civil  Service  shall  swear  the  Oath  of 
Allegiance,  Oath  of  Secrecy  and  the  Official  Oath as  provided  in 
the Civil Service Law.   
 
(2) A  staff  of  the  Civil  Service shall  not  be  considered  for  appointment 
unless there  is  evidence  of  his  compliance  with  sub-section  (1)  of 
this Instruction.  
 
 
PART VIII 
COMMENCEMENT 
 
375. Effective Date of Implementation 
These Administrative Instructions shall operate with effect from ................ 
day of ........................................, 2020.  
 
 
 
DATE OF ISSUE........................................ 
 
 
SIGNATURE............................................. 
 
 
 

 
198 
 
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX I: A MODEL ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE FOR A MINISTRY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HON. MINISTER 
DEPUTY MINISTER (S) 
CHIEF DIRECTOR 
POLICY, PLANNING, 
BUDGETING, 
MONITORING AND 
EVALUATION  
RESEARCH, 
STATISTICS AND 
INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT  
HUMAN RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT 
AND 
DEVELOPMENT  
GENERAL 
ADMINISTRATION 
AND FINANCE  

 
199 
 
APPENDIX II: SCHEDULES  
FIRST SCHEDULE 
CATEGORY “A” POSTS 
 
Head of the Civil Service 
Chief Director 
Coordinating Director 
Controller and Accountant-General 
Director (Administration) 
Director (Head of Department) 
Director, Procurement and Supply Chain Department 
Chief Rent Control Officer 
Principal, CSTC, ITS, GSS 
Director, NFED 
Director, ICCES 
Executive Secretary, Management Services Department  
Foreign Service Officer A1 
Director of Budget 
Engineer-in-Chief, Public Works Department 
Registrar of Scholarships 
Registrar of Births and Deaths 
Registrar of Co-operatives 
Director, PRAAD 
Chief Labour Officer 
Chief Management Analyst  
Chief Parks and Gardens Officer 
Chief Training Officer 
Chief Commercial Officer 
Chief Procurement and Supply Chain Manager 
  
  
  
  
  
       
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
     
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
.   
  
  
  
  

 
200 
 
Chief Tourism Officer 
Chief Programme Officer 
Chief Engineer 
Deputy Controller and Accountant-General 
Assistant Controller and Accountant-General 
Chief Planning Officer 
Chief Economics Officer 
Chief Budget Analyst 
Chief Industrial Promotions Officer 
Chief Inspector of Factories 
Chief Research Officer  
Chief Agricultural Officer  
 

 
201 
 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
CATEGORY “B” POSTS 
 
Deputy Director (Administration/Deputy Head of Department) 
Foreign Service, A2 and A3 
Deputy Registrar of Co-operatives 
Deputy Registrar of Births and Deaths 
Chief Accountant 
Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories 
Deputy Chief Labour Officer. 
Principal Training Officer 
Principal Tourism Officer 
Principal Management Analyst 
Principal Engineer 
Principal Research Officer  
 
 

 
202 
 
THIRD SCHEDULE 
CATEGORY “C” POSTS 
 
Assistant Director (Departmental) 
Assistant Budget Analyst to Principal Budget Analyst 
Assistant Director 1 (Administration) 
Assistant Director IIA and IIB(Administration) 
Foreign Officer A4 and A5 
Foreign Officer B1 to B5 
Foreign Officer C1 to C3 
Stenographer Secretary to Senior Private Secretary 
Assistant Engineer to Principal Engineer 
Higher Executive Officer to Chief Executive Officer 
Assistant Engineering Technician to Chief Engineering Technician 
Foreman (Works) to Chief Works Superintendent 
Technical Officer Grade 1 to Chief Technical Officer 
Assistant Estate Manager to Chief Estate Manager 
Assistant Estate Officer to Chief Estate Officer 
Assistant Landscape Designer Grade 1 to Chief Landscape Designer 
Assistant Transport Officer to Transport Manager 
Assistant Systems Analyst to Systems Development Manager 
Assistant Programmer to Senior Programmer 
Industrial Property Registration Officer to Chief Industrial Property Registration 
Officer 
Supply Officer to Principal Supply Officer 
Assistant Commercial Officer to Principal Commercial Officer 
Assistant Industrial Promotion Officer to Principal Industrial 
Promotion Officer 
Assistant Geologist to Principal Geologist 

 
203 
 
Assistant Geophysicist to Principal Geophysicist 
Assistant Geochemist to Principal Geochemist 
Assistant Seismologist to Principal Seismologist 
Assistant Inspector of Mines to Principal Inspector of Mines 
Assistant Staff Surveyor to Principal Staff Surveyor 
Assistant Surveying Technician to Chief Surveying Technician 
Assistant Meteorologist to Principal Meteorologist 
Assistant Meteorological Officer to Chief Meteorological Officer 
Assistant Accountant to Principal Accountant 
Accounts Officer to Chief Accounts Officer 
Assistant Catering Officer to Chief Catering Officer 
Assistant Protocol Officer to Chief Protocol Officer 
Assistant Staff Training Officer to Chief Staff Training Officer 
Assistant Management Analyst to Senior Management Analyst  
Assistant Labour Officer to Principal Labour Officer 
Assistant Inspector of Factories to Assistant Chief Inspector of Factories 
Assistant Co-operatives Officer to Principal Co-operatives Officer 
Assistant Agricultural Officer to Principal Agricultural Officer 
Assistant Social Development Officer Principal Social Development Officer 
Assistant Community Development Officer to Principal Community 
Development Officer 
Assistant Rehabilitation Officer to Principal Rehabilitation Officer 
Assistant Information Officer to Principal Information Officer 
Assistant Registration Officer to Chief Registration Officer 
(Births and Deaths) 
  

 
204 
 
FOURTH SCHEDULE 
CATEGORY “D” POSTS 
 
Executive Officer 
All Pre- Service Training Grades I.e. Stenographer Grade 11, Technical Officer 
Grade 11 
Junior Foreman 
Senior Typist (and all Typist Grades) 
Kitchen Staff Supervisor (Kitchen Staff and Cook grades) 
Artisan 
Yard Foreman 
Auto Mechanic 
Driver Mechanic (and all Driver Grades) 
Tradesman (all trades and vocations) 
 

 
205 
 
FIFTH SCHEDULE 
CATEGORY “E” POSTS 
 
Labourer (General, Conservancy, Sanitary, Grass cutters etc.  
Messenger 
Chief Messenger 
Watchmen (Night and Day) 
Caretaker 
Gardener 
Porter 
Rat Catcher 
Stores Assistant 
Pump Attendant Brush Hand 
Kitchen Assistant 
Steward 
Sales Girl (Parks and Gardens) 
Employment Assistant (Labour Department) 
Information Centre Assistant 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 

 
206 
 
SIXTH SCHEDULE – GUIDELINES ON DISCIPLINARY AWARDS 
No. PERFORMANCE 
PROBLEM 
FIRST OFFENCE SECOND OFFENCE THIRD 
OFFENCE 
FOURTH 
OFFENCE 
1. Reporting to 
work under the 
influence of 
liquor or drug 
Written warning 
and one (1) day 
suspension w/o  
 pay  
Counselling/Medical 
Support 
Five (5) days 
suspension 
w/o pay up 
to 
termination  
Dismissal 
2. Drinking 
alcoholic 
beverages on 
the job 
Written warning   Counselling/Medical 
Support 
Ten (10) 
days 
suspension 
w/o pay up 
to 
termination  
Dismissal 
3. Using illegal 
drugs on the job 
or bringing such 
drugs into the 
office 
Ten (10) days 
suspension w/o 
pay up to 
termination 
Counselling/Medical 
Support 
Dismissal  
4. Falsification of 
records 
Dismissal     
5. Stealing Dismissal     
6. Violation of 
written rules 
regulation, or 
policies of a 
security nature 
Written warning 
up to termination 
Ten (10) days 
suspension w/o pay to 
termination 
(Care should be given 
seriousness of situation 
whether negligence is 
willful or unwilful) 
Dismissal  
7. Negligence in 
carrying out job 
responsibilities 
Written warning  Ten (10) days 
suspension w/o pay 
up to termination 
(Care should be 
exercised to consider 
seriousness of offence 
and whether offence 
is willful or unwilful) 
  
8. Fighting with Written warning, Five (5) days Dismissal   

 
207 
 
other workers suspension and 
termination  
suspension w/o pay to 
termination                                                                                                             
(Consideration should 
be given to the type 
of equipment or 
property involved, 
situation and purpose; 
security vs.                       
non-security)                                                                                                    
9. Unauthorised 
use of state 
equipment 
Written warning 
up to termination  
Five (5) days 
suspension w/o pay to 
termination                                                                                                               
(Consideration should 
be given to the type 
of equipment or 
property involved, 
situation and purpose; 
security vs. non-
security)                                                                                                                                         
Dismissal   
10. Destruction or 
misuse of state 
property or 
equipment                        
Written warning 
up to termination 
Five (5) days 
suspension w/o pay 
up to termination 
Dismissal  
11. Unauthorised 
solicitation of 
sales on state 
premises during 
normal working 
hours (Any sales 
or solicitation 
must be 
approved in 
advance by the 
Director or 
Head of 
Administration) 
Written warning 
up to termination 
Five (5) days 
suspension w/o pay 
up to termination 
Dismissal  
12. Absence from 
work without 
permission  
Written warning Five (5) days 
suspension w/o pay 
(Each unauthorized 
day of absence must 
be without pay. 
Accrued leave must 
Termination  

 
208 
 
not be used for 
unauthorized 
absence from work) 
13. Absence from 
work for ten (10) 
consecutive 
days w/o 
permission  
Termination 
(if no credible 
evidence/reason 
is provided as an 
excuse for the 
absence from 
work)                                                                                                                                       
   
14. Sleeping while 
on duty 
Written warning 
up to five (5) days 
suspension w/o 
pay up to 
termination                                                            
(Consideration 
should be given as 
to security vs. non-
security of the 
situation)  
Five (5) days 
suspension w/o pay 
up to termination 
Dismissal  
15. Reporting for 
work late 
without 
notification 
Verbal warning 
each time up to 
two (2) times in a 
30-day period 
Written warning with 
three (3) occurrences 
in a 30-day period, or 
any four (4) 
occurrences within a 
60-day period  
Up to ten 
(10) days 
suspension 
w/o pay 
Dismissal 
after having 
been 
warned and 
suspended 
16. Horseplay 
resulting in 
physical harm 
Five (5) days 
suspension w/o 
pay to termination 
Ten (10) days 
suspension w/o pay to 
termination 
 
Termination  
17. Malicious use of 
profane and 
abusive 
language to 
others on the 
job           
Verbal warning up 
to five (5) days 
suspension w/o 
pay 
Written warning Five (5) days 
suspension 
w/o pay 
 
Dismissal 
18. Loafing Verbal warning Written warning Five (5) days 
suspension 
w/o pay to 
Dismissal 

 
209 
 
termination 
19. Interference 
with other 
employees’ 
work 
Verbal warning Written warning Five (5) days 
suspension 
w/o pay to 
termination 
Dismissal 
20. Gambling 
during working 
hours     
Five (5) days 
suspension w/o 
pay 
Termination   
21. Working on 
non-official jobs 
during working 
hours            
Written warning                 5 days suspension, 
(w/o pay 
Termination