i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CODE OF CONDUCT   
 
 
 
 
FOR THE    
 
 
 
 
GHANA CIVIL SERVICE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOVEMBER, 2022 
RCU, OHCS 

ii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
1.0. INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................... 1 
2.0. APPLICATION, SCOPE AND PURPOSE .................................................................................. 1 
3.0. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE CODE ................................................................................ 2 
3.1. PRINCIPLE 1 – ABIDING BY THE CONSTITUTION AND LAWS OF GHANA WITH 
DIGNITY, INTEGRITY AND PROFESSIONALISM ...................................................................... 3 
3.2. PRINCIPLE 2 – ADHERING TO APPROPRIATE STANDARDS WITH HONESTY 
AND EFFICIENCY. .............................................................................................................................. 5 
3.3. PRINCIPLE 3 – REFRAINING FROM BRINGING THE CIVIL SERVICE INTO 
DISREPUTE ......................................................................................................................................... 10 
3.4. PRINCIPLE 4 – AVOIDING CONFLICT OF INTEREST ................................................ 14 
3.5. PRINCIPLE 5 – MAINTAINING POLITICAL NEUTRALITY IN THE 
PERFORMANCE OF ONE’S OFFICIAL DUTIES. ....................................................................... 17 
3.6. PRINCIPLE 6 – ADHERING TO THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC LIFE .. 18 
4.0. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ............................................................................................ 19 
5.0. REPORTING PROCEDURE ..................................................................................................... 20 
6.0. DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES/ PENALTIES ..................................................................... 20 
7.0. REWARDS ..................................................................................................................................... 23 
8.0. RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPLEMENTATION ..................................................................... 24 
8.1. Office of the Head of the Civil Service (OHCS) ...................................................................... 24 
8.2. Ministries and Departments ..................................................................................................... 24 
9.0. DEFINITION OF KEY CONCEPTS ........................................................................................ 25 
 

1 
 
1.0.    INTRODUCTION  
The Ghana Civil Service is an integral part of the Public Administration System (PAS) of Ghana. Its 
core mandate as stated in the Civil Service Act, 1993 (PNDCL 327) is to assist the Government to 
formulate  and  implement  policies  to  promote  good  governance  and  socio-economic  development 
for Ghanaians. This calls for a diligent, customer sensitive and responsive Civil Service.  
For these aspirations to be firmly established in the Service’s culture/psyche, a Code of Conduct for 
Civil  Service  staff should  conform  to  appropriate  norms  and  standards  of  behaviour  and  attitudes 
governing normal interactions between the Civil Service Staff and his employer on one hand, and his 
clients/public on the other.  
The  standards  and  norms  of  behaviour  prescribed  provide  a  framework  for  promoting  good 
governance,  projecting  the  good  image  of  the  Civil  Service,  and  sustaining  its  self-esteem  in  both 
local and international circles.  
For these rules to be pragmatic or realistic, they have been formulated to reflect the human rights of 
the worker, local and international labour regulations, as well as the culture of the people of Ghana 
and the working environment of the staff.  
The  Code  of  Conduct  should  be  viewed  primarily  as  a guide  to Civil  Service  staff in  their  normal 
relationships  and  dealings  with  their  principal  stakeholders,  viz,  the  Government,  Civil  Service 
Organisations,  the  business  community  and  the  general  public.  Nevertheless,  provision  has been 
made for appropriate administrative sanctions to be applied where the conduct of Civil Service staff 
is found to be inconsistent with the Code of Conduct.  
This undertaking is made in the conviction that employment in the Civil Service of Ghana places the 
Civil Servant under a moral obligation to work conscientiously to earn his or her living and to look 
upon his or her work as a contribution to making the economy of Ghana strong and healthy.  
 
2.0.   APPLICATION, SCOPE AND PURPOSE 
1. In pursuance of Section 92 (3) and (4) (a), of the Civil Service Law, 1993 (PNDC Law 327), the 
Head  of  Civil  Service  in  consultation with  the  Civil  Service  Council hereby,  issue  as  part  of  the 
Administrative Instructions, the Code of Conduct of the Civil Service.  
2. This Code is applicable to the following personnel:  
i. Officers holding a Civil Service post; 
ii. A Civil  Service  staff,  either  on  contract  or  secondment  to an approved  employment  or  on 
leave with/without pay, annual leave, or, on course of training.  
iii. Consultants  and  Technical  Advisors  and  other  person  working  in  the  Civil  Service  or 
undertaking a Civil Service assignment.  
 

2 
 
3.0.  GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE CODE  
The Code of Conduct for the Civil Service has been drawn up, incorporating the following general 
principles:  
Principle  1 – Abiding  by  the  Constitution  and  Laws  of  Ghana  with dignity,  integrity  and 
professionalism; 
Principle 2 – Adhering to appropriate standards with honesty and efficiency; 
Principle 3 – Refraining from bringing the Civil Service into disrepute;   
Principle 4 – Avoiding conflict of interest; 
Principle 5 – Maintaining political neutrality in the performance of one’s official duties; and  
Principle  6 – Adhering to  the  guiding  principles  of  public  life:  Selflessness,  Integrity,  Justice  and 
Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, and Leadership.  
 
 

3 
 
3.1. PRINCIPLE  1 – ABIDING  BY  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  LAWS  OF 
GHANA WITH DIGNITY, INTEGRITY AND PROFESSIONALISM 
 
3.1.1. Constitutional Responsibilities 
A Civil Service staff shall serve the duly constituted Government, in accordance with the principles 
set out in this Code and recognizing: -  
a) The accountability  of Civil  Service  Staff to  the  President  and  Parliament  through  Ministers 
of State, as well as to the Public;  
b) The duty of all Civil Service staff to discharge public functions reasonably and in accordance 
with the  law;  
c) As may apply and if a professional, shall be bound by and observe the professional code of 
conduct and ethics he might be required to subscribe to. The professional requirements and ethical 
standards  of  the  said  body  shall not  contravene  with  the  Constitution, this  code  or  any  other laws 
governing the Civil Service;  
d) The  duty  to  comply  with  the  law,  including  international  law,  best  practice and  treaty 
obligations, and to uphold the administration of justice; 
e) The Civil Service Staff shall serve the Civil Service and the State with honesty, transparency, 
accountability, fairness, professionalism, integrity, neutrality and impartiality; 
e) The Civil Service staff shall ensure that their personal interests or activities do not interfere 
with or appear to interfere with the obligations to serve the  Ghana Civil Service, the State, and the 
citizenry; and 
f)        The need to observe the Ghana Public Service work ethic.   
 
3.1.2. Performance Management Culture 
A Civil Service staff shall ensure that the fully complies with the performance management culture 
of the Civil Service by periodically completing the annual Performance Appraisal Instrument as may 
apply to the grade to promote productivity and professionalism in the Civil Service; 
 
3.1.3. Affirmative Action  
A Civil    Service    staff shall    fully    support    and    implement    effectively    Government’s 
policies/programmes  aimed  at  protecting  vulnerable  groups  in  society, including women,  the 
disabled,  children  etc.  from  undue  discriminatory  practices  that  may  tend  to  hinder  their  socio-
economic advancement.  

4 
 
3.1.4. Accountability to Government and obligation to Society 
A Civil   Service  staff shall   always   remain   faithful   to   the   policies/programmes/plans of   the 
Government  and  should  seek  to  implement  Government  policies/programmes/plans  impartially, 
transparently and efficiently at all times.  
 
3.1.5. Promotion of Good Governance  
A Civil  Service  staff shall  seek  to  actively  promote  and  facilitate  the  processes  of  developing  and 
implementing governmental  functions consistent  with  economic  growth  and  development  and  the 
rule of law; and for the wellbeing of the society/the citizenry, as a whole.  

5 
 
3.2. PRINCIPLE   2 – ADHERING   TO   APPROPRIATE   STANDARDS   WITH 
HONESTY AND EFFICIENCY. 
3.2.1. Standards and Work Ethics  
Civil  Service  staff shall  accept  personal  responsibility  for  developing  and  exhibiting  a  strong  work 
ethic  and  affirm  their  commitment  to  combating  negative work  habits  in  the  Civil  Service. To  this 
end, any person working in the Civil Service of Ghana is committed to the following work ethics:  
 (a)  Reporting for duty punctually and in good time before work begins. He or she will not 
engage in, nor encourage the practice of:   
i. Habitual  lateness  to  work  and  meetings  using  weather,  poor  transportation  and  domestic 
problems and other excuses. 
ii. Taking more than the approved leave period. 
iii. Irregular attendance.  
Unless otherwise stated, the official working hours in the Civil Service are:-   
Monday – Friday:     8.30 a.m. – 12.30 p.m.    
1.30 p.m. – 5.00 p.m. 
(b)  Devoting,  during working hours,  his  or  her  full  time, attention and  competence to 
the business of his organization. He or she will not engage in, nor encourage the practice of:  
i. Being at work but doing no work;  
ii. Being deliberately and unduly slow in carrying out an activity or assignment (go–slow; work-
to-rule); 
iii. Using or exaggerating sickness to avoid duty or work;  
iv. Trading, selling or transacting private financial business on the premises of organizations; 
v. Receiving and entertaining social visits;  
vi. Managing babies and children outside designed areas;   
vii. Performing unofficial duties or activities during office hours;  
viii. Drunkenness on the job and/or being under the influence of narcotic drugs; and 
ix. Eating outside of organisation’s designated areas. 
 
(c)  Guarding  against  absenting  himself  or  herself  from  work  without  permission  or 
reasonable excuse. He  or she will not engage in, nor encourage the practice of:  
i. Persistently leaving work early; 
ii. Not returning promptly to work after meal breaks and approved leave;  
iii. Being absent from duty without official permission; 
iv. Vacating post and failing to inform competent authority when leaving station; and  
v. Non-opening of service counters in time and leaving counters unattended.  
 

6 
 
(d)  Following  and  obeying  lawful,  legitimate  or  reasonable definite  instructions,  and 
complying with laid-down procedures relating to one’s work. He or she will not engage in, nor 
encourage the practice of:  
i. Sabotaging efforts of colleagues, organizations and Government as employer; 
ii. Talking about the stress level of daily work and using this as an excuse for not working. 
 
(e)  Taking pride and joy in doing more than is required by duty. He or she will not engage 
in, nor encourage the practice of:  
i. Setting personal limits beyond which one’s commitment will not extend;  
ii. Not wanting to do overtime;  
iii. Providing poor quality service and not striving for excellence in the service of fellow-men.  
 
(f)  Responding  to  legitimate  requests  and  demands  of  members  of  the  public  with 
urgency, promptness and timeliness. He or she will not engage in, nor encourage the practice of:  
i. Demanding or accepting gifts of any kind to influence the delivery of a service;  
ii. Disregarding deadlines, action steps and target dates;  
iii. Being unfriendly, rude and discourteous to staff, clients and the public; and  
iv. Not returning phone calls and emails promptly.  
 
(g) Seeing  a  task  through  and  having  a  sense  or  pride  in  accomplishing  assignments  every 
time. He or she will not engage in nor encourage the practice of:  
i. Putting off to tomorrow what can be done today and now; and 
ii. Conducting business and delivering services poorly and ineffectively. 
 
(h)  Undertaking tasks in ways that contribute effectively to achieving the goals of his or her 
organization. He or she will not engage in, nor encourage the practice of:  
i. Being lackadaisical with in performance of duty;  
ii. Refusing to rise to the occasion;  
iii. Gaining the reputation of one who cannot be “counted on” by the organization;  
iv. Intentionally neglecting one’s duty; 
v. Not maintaining accurate and transparent  records relating to his duties; and 
vi. Falsifying any records 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
3.2.2. Customer/Client Orientation  
i. A  Civil  Service staff  shall  be  courteous  and  prepared  to  help  a  customer/visitor  who  seeks 
for Their services.  If they are not in a position to assist, the Officer may refer the visitor to 
another  officer  to  deal  with  the  client.    In  all  circumstances, A  Civil  Service  Staff must  not 
snub a customer but shall be accommodating to him or her.  
ii. A  Civil  Service  staff  shall  respond  to  legitimate  requests and  demands  of  members  of  the 
public and business community with urgency, promptness and fairness. 
 
3.2.3. Transactions with Public/Clients (Local and Foreign) 
i. A Civil  Service  staff  shall  at  all  times  have  the  public  interest  in  mind,  and  shall  serve  the 
public in an unbiased and impartial manner.  
ii. In all their dealings with clients, Civil Service staff should not use their authority or office for 
personal  gain  but always  seek  to  enhance  the  image  and  uphold  the  self-esteem  of  the 
Service and Ghana by:  
a) Maintaining an unimpeachable standard of integrity consistent with the provisions of 
the Code of  Conduct for the Ghana Civil Service;  
b) Complying both with the letter and spirit of any contractual obligations;  
c) Being approachable, discreet and polite in all interactions with the client;  
d) Inhibiting arrogant conduct and self-centredness;  
e) Avoiding the use of intemperate language; and 
f) Partnering and promoting the development of the private sector. 
iii. A Civil  Service  staff shall  not  be  an  agent  of,  or  further  the  interests  of  a  foreign 
government, organisation or individual in a manner that may be detrimental to the interests 
of the Service or the Nation. 
 
3.2.4. Financial Responsibility  
Civil Service staff should ensure the proper, effective and efficient use of public money within their 
control.  
 
3.2.5. Avoidance of waste  
Civil Service staff should avoid waste in the use of human, financial and material resources as well as 
time. At all material moments, the Civil Service staff must avoid the misuse of any public office; 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
3.2.6. Use of Government Property/Material 
A Civil Service Staff shall use the property and assets of the organisation for official purposes only, 
and shall exercise reasonable care when using such property and assets. They must not engage in any 
activity that amounts to abuse of office. 
 
3.2.7. Use of Government Labour 
i. A  Civil  Service  Staff shall  not  employ  for  private  purposes,  the  services  of  Government 
employees at times during which the services of the latter are at the disposal of Government. 
ii. These  provisions  do  not  apply when  arrangements  have  been  authorized  by  a Chief 
Director/Head of Department whereby services, which may involve the use of Government 
property, may be rendered by Government employees within official working hours for the 
benefit of members of the public, including Government officers, in return  for a charge to 
be paid into the Consolidated Fund.  
 
3.2.8. Public Appearance, Press, Broadcast etc  
i. A  Civil  Service staff shall  not  without  the  express  permission  of  the  Head  of the Civil 
Service,  act  as  the  editor  of any  newspaper,  or  take  part  directly  or  indirectly  in  the 
management thereof, nor publish in any manner anything which may reasonably be regarded 
as of political nature or relating to the administration of the country. This provision does not 
affect any Civil Service staff who is required as part of his official duties to edit any paper or 
subscribe articles thereto.   
They may, however, publish in their own name matters relating to subjects of general interest.  
 
3.2.9. Public Lectures/Statements  
i. Where a Civil Service Staff who is invited to give a public lecture which relates to the work 
of the Ministry or Department in which they work, or, any other official business, the Chief 
Director  of  the  Ministry  concerned  shall  be  consulted  about  any  policy  or  political 
implications and their prior approval obtained; and in the case of the Chief Director or Head 
of a Ministry, this should be sought from the Head of the Civil Service.   
ii. A Civil Service staff, in making any public statement, must ensure that it is accurate, and not 
misleading, and not one that is likely to cause public resentment or outrage.     
iii. Similarly, A  Civil  Service Staff should not  engage  in indiscreet converations and  unguarded 
statements.  
 
 

9 
 
3.2.10. Anonymous Articles  
i. A Civil  Service  staff should  avoid  writing  or  circulating anonymous  or  vexatious  letters or 
statements  on any social media platform with malicious intent.  
ii. A Civil Service staff would be deemed acting contrary to the tenets of the Code of Conduct 
if the authorship of such anonymous articles or publications in which he/she discusses any 
political subject should be established against him.  
 
 
3.2.11. Communication of Confidential Information  
i. A  Civil  Service staff shall  protect  non-public,  confidential  and  /or  classified information  at 
all times; 
ii. A  Civil  Service staff,  unless  specially  authorized,  shall  not  communicate  either  directly  or 
indirectly to the press, social media or to any person such information obtained by virtue of 
his  office, which is  not  available  to  the  public, the  disclosure  of  which may  damage  the 
security or other interests of his organisation or the State.  
iii. A  Civil  Service staff shall  not  seek  to  frustrate  the  policies,  decisions,  or actions,  of 
Government by the unauthorized, improper, or premature disclosure of any information to 
which he has had access as a Civil Service staff.  
iv. A  Civil  Service staff shall  not  without  authority,  disclose  to  a  private  person,  or  public 
official,  for his  own  personal  advantage,  information  which  has  been  communicated  in 
confidence to him or has come to his knowledge as a Civil Service staff.  
v. A Civil Service staff shall not copy information relating to his work for personal gain.  
vi. A Civil Service staff shall not disclose his work related password to anybody. Officers who 
act contrary to this, will be held responsible for all system activity that occurs using their ID 
and password.  
vii. A Civil  Service  staff who  has the  responsibility  for  managing  computerized  personnel  and 
related  data  in  the  Civil Service  shall  not  disclose  or  use  such  information  for  any  purpose 
without the approval of the relevant authority, and the use of such data must not contravene 
national or international legislation.  
viii. A  Civil  Service  staff  shall  take  all  reasonable  steps  to ensure  that  confidential  or  secret 
information  or  documents  entrusted  to  his or  her  care  are  adequately  protected  from 
improper or inadvertent disclosure. 
ix. A  Civil Service  staff shall  ensure  that  all  relevant  legislations  of  Data  Protection  and  any 
citizens  rights  to  information  per  the  Data  Protection  Act, 2012 (Act  843), the  Rights to 
Information Act, 2019 (Act 989) and other related legislations are complied with. 
 

10 
 
3.3. PRINCIPLE 3 – REFRAINING FROM BRINGING THE CIVIL SERVICE 
INTO DISREPUTE 
3.3.1. Courtesy in Communication  
i. A  Civil  Service staff must  show  courtesy  and  decency  in  his  communication  about  any 
person or matter that is under consideration or forms the subject of comment or response.  
ii. A  Civil  Service staff shall refrain  from  the  use  of  insulting  or  intimidating  words  against 
Authority, a fellow Civil Servant, or, customer, or, from showing disrespect to any of them.  
 
3.3.2. Libel or Slander  
Any Civil Servant who libels or slanders another may be investigated and the appropriate disciplinary 
action  may  be  taken against  him.    Such  disciplinary  action  will  be  without  prejudice  to  any  action 
that the aggrieved person may decide to take.  
 
3.3.3. Tax Evasion  
Where a Civil Service Staff is permitted to engage in any other job, or finds himself a job approved 
by appropriate authority, he should ensure that he fulfils all his tax obligations.  
 
3.3.4. Assaults  
A  Civil  Service staff shall  not  engage  in  verbal  assault  or  be  involved  in  scuffle  or  physical  assault 
except in self-defence, on any Government premises, or in any public place to the embarrassment of 
the Civil Service.  
 
3.3.5. Malpractice at Public Examinations  
i. A  Civil  Service staff,  whether  as  examiner,  invigilator/supervisor  or  candidate  shall  not 
indulge in any form of examination malpractice. 
ii. A Civil Service staff shall not leak public examination questions to any candidates.  
iii. All examination malpractices shall constitute misconduct.  
 
3.3.6. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages/Narcotic Drugs  
i. A Civil Service Staff should   avoid smoking, g or drinking alcoholic beverage, during official 
working  hours,  and  should  not  be  found  drunk  to  the  embarrassment  of  his  fellow Civil 
Service staff and the Civil Service.  

11 
 
ii. Habitual  drunkenness  or  addiction  to  drugs  shall  be  viewed  as  damaging  the  interest  and 
image of the Civil Service.  
iii. Civil Service staff should  avoid the use of narcotic drugs and should not be found engaging  
in an form of narcotic drugs or plants related issues  
 
3.3.7. Sexual Harassment/other Malpractices 
i. A  Civil  Service staff shall  not  exploit  his  relationship  with  another  officer/person  to  gain 
advantage  of  him/her,  sexually,  or  confer  undue  favours  on  him,  for sexual  and  other 
purposes. 
ii. A Civil Service staff shall refrain from engaging in sexual affairs in Government offices, or in 
any criminal sexual acts or malpractices anywhere. 
iii. Sexual harassment by a Civil Service staff of his opposite or same sex may take such forms 
as:  
• threatening punitive action,  
• giving favours to cause the opposite or same sex to yield to one’s sexual desires,  
• making a request or exerting subtle pressure for sexual activity or favours,  
• making intentional or careless physical contact that is sexual in nature,  
• making  gestures,  noises,  jokes  or  comments  including  innuendos  regarding  another 
person's sexuality,  
• Sending of sexually suggestive texts, pictures or videos. 
 
3.3.8. Disruption of Office Work  
A Civil Service staff should not, during working hours, engage in behaviour or conduct that disrupts 
or interferes with work of other officers by such means as: congregating in offices, or outside their 
offices and engaging in gossip.  
 
3.3.9. Trading Activities in Offices   
A Civil Service staff shall not engage in unofficial commercial activities on office premises nor shall 
he encourage peddlers to sell to him, during working hours.  
 
3.3.10. Destructive Criticism of another Civil Servant  
A  Civil  Service staff shall not  maliciously/destructively  criticize or or  make an oral  or  written 
communication  of  a  false statement  of  another  Civil  Service staff work  or  conduct  that unjustly 
harms their reputation.  
 

12 
 
3.3.11. Culture of Confidentiality  
Civil  Service  staff should continue  to maintain  the  ethic/culture  of  confidentiality  even  after  they 
have left office.  In other words, they should not release confidential information they have come by 
during  their  tenure  of  office  to  unauthorized  people,  when  they  are  out  of  office.    To  do  so,  they 
might  render  themselves  liable  under  the  State  Secrets  Act,  1962  (Act  101) or  any  other  related 
regulation.  
 
3.3.12. Public Demonstrations  
All public demonstrations by Civil Service staff should be decorous and peaceful.  
 
3.3.13. Sale/Purchase of Personal Property  
i. Except with the prior sanction of the Head of the Civil Service, no official may sell or hire 
his own or another official’s private property  to  Government,  nor  may  he  purchase  any 
private property for Government nor furnish supplies on payment without permission.  
ii. A Civil  Service  staff shall not  use  his  or  her  office  to  wrongfully  or  unlawfully  acquire  or 
influence the acquisition of property. 
 
3.3.14. Loan  
A Civil Service staff may not give any loan whatsoever to another at interest nor shall he act as agent 
for a money lender nor take part in collecting debt on behalf of money lenders.  
 
3.3.15. Pecuniary Embarrassment   
i. Pecuniary  embarrassment  from whatever  cause  will  be  regarded  as  a  circumstance  which 
necessarily  has  the  effect  of  impairing  the  efficiency  of a Civil  Service staff.  Such 
embarrassment, if  occasioned  by  imprudence  or  other  reprehensible  cause  or,  by  recklessly 
standing  as  security  for  another  person  will  be  deemed  to  affect  the  respectability  of  the 
Service and the trustworthiness of the individual.  
ii. A Civil Service staff should avoid subscribing to a transaction of any value such as giving his 
name  on  a  promissory  note,  or  bond  or  like  document,  whether  as a  principal  or  surety  or 
endorsing any instrument whether for his own purposes or another which is likely to result 
in financial embarrassment.  
 
 
 
 

13 
 
3.3.16. Bankruptcy  
i. A  Civil  Service staff found  to  be  bankrupt,  or  entering  into  arrangement with  his  creditors 
under any existing legislation on Bankruptcy, would be considered an embarrassment to the 
Civil Service. 
ii. Any Civil Service staff, on being indicted for debt or against whom bankruptcy proceedings 
are taken, must immediately inform his Chief Director or Head of Department of the fact.  
 
3.3.17. Collection of Contributions 
The collection of contributions in cash or in kind from members of staff or the public to defray the 
cost  of  presentations  to  any  other  officer  (or  officers)  without  the  consent of  the  staff  in general, 
must  not  be  encouraged.    However,  should  donations  be  found  necessary,  the  issue  must  be 
discussed at a Staff Durbar and the prior support of the staff obtained.  
 

14 
 
3.4.  PRINCIPLE 4 – AVOIDING CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
 
3.4.1. Private Gain  
A Civil Service staff shall not use public office directly or indirectly for private gain  
 
3.4.2. Nepotism and Award of Contract 
A Civil Service staff shall not put himself, family or friends in a position where his or their interest 
conflicts with the functions of his office.  
 
3.4.3. Use of previous office  
A  Civil  Service staff shall  not,  on  termination  of  employment,  take  improper  advantage  of his 
previous office.  
 
3.4.4. Use of state property  
A Civil Service staff shall not use or permit the use of state property for activities not associated with 
the performance of his official duties. 
 
3.4.5. Influence peddling  
A  Civil  Service staff shall  not  use his office  to seek  to  influence  a  decision to  be  made  by  another 
person to further his interest.  
 
3.4.6. Self-dealing 
A  Civil  Service staff shall  not  take  an action  in  an  official  capacity  which  involves  dealing  with 
him/herself in a private capacity and which confers a benefit to himself/herself.  
 
3.4.7. Gifts, Remuneration and Favours  
1. A  Civil  Service staff is  prohibited  from  receiving  valuable  gifts whether  in  the  shape  of 
money, goods, hospitality or other personal benefits, if he has reason to believe that the gifts 
received are intended to influence his judgement or action on a case he is dealing with or will 
handle  in  the  future.    It  is  equally  reprehensible  for a Civil  Service  Staff to  give  a  gift  to 
influence the judgement or action of another person in his favour.  

15 
 
2. In  circumstances  where a Civil Service  Staff is  presented  with  a  gift  of  any  character,  he 
should exercise his own judgement as to whether he should decline the offer, otherwise he 
should consult with his superior officer.  
3. At  any  rate,  the  value  of  a  gift  will  be  determined  by  the  circumstances  of  the  transaction 
between the giver and the recipient.  
 
3.4.8. Bribe  
A Civil Service staff shall not demand, receive or give any bribe, nor be an agent for any person who 
intends to influence a Civil Service staff with a bribe.  
 
3.4.9. Accepting Money from a Member of the Public  
i. An  officer  may  not  in his  personal  or official  capacity,  receive  any  payment  from 
government funds on behalf of, or, as agent for any member of the public.  
ii. All  moneys  paid  to an  Officer  must  either  be  due to  him  personally,  or, paid  to  him  in  his 
official capacity, in which case, they must be properly brought to account.  
iii. Failure  to  comply  with  this  provision  will  render  both  the  paying  and  receiving  Officers 
liable and responsible for any loss of Government money which may occur.  
 
3.4.10    General  Provisions on Conflict of Interest 
i. A Civil Service staff shall use the best efforts to avoid being in a situation where that officer's 
personal interests conflict with or appear to conflict with the officer's official duties.  
ii. Without limiting the generality of sub-paragraph (1), a staff shall not hold shares or have any 
other interest in a company, partnership or other body, directly or through another person, if 
the holding of those shares or having that interest would result in a conflict with his or her 
official duties.  
iii. A Civil Service staff whose personal interests are or may be in conflict with his or her official 
duties shall declare those personal interests to the Chief Director or Head of Department for 
the necessary action to be taken.  
iv. A staff of the Civil Service shall not award or influence the award of a contract to 
a) himself or herself,  
b) his or her spouse or child; or  
c) a business associate or agent.  
v. In this paragraph, a "conflict of interest" includes the interest of a spouse, a child, a business 
associate or an agent, or any other matter in which the public officer has a direct or indirect 
pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest.  
vi. Where a Civil Service staff is present at a meeting where an issue that is likely to result in a 
conflict of interest is to be discussed, he or she shall declare the interest at the beginning of 
the meeting or before the issue is deliberated upon.  

16 
 
vii. A declaration of a conflict of interest shall be recorded in the minutes of that meeting.  
viii. All  Civil  Service  Orgnisations shall  maintain  a  register  of  conflicts  of  interest as  specified 
under this Code (Schedule One) in which an affected officer shall register the particulars of 
registrable interests, stating the nature and extent of the conflict.  
ix. The Civil Service Orgnisation shall keep the register of conflicts of interests for five (5) years 
after the last entry in each volume of the register.  
x. A Civil  Service  staff shall  amend  the  record  of  his  or  her  registrable  interest  in  the  register 
maintained under sub-paragraph (ix) whenever there is a change in those registrable interest 
and  such  an  amendment  shall  be  made  within  thirty  days  of  the  change  in  the  conflict  of 
interest. 

17 
 
3.5. PRINCIPLE 5 – MAINTAINING POLITICAL NEUTRALITY IN THE 
PERFORMANCE OF ONE’S OFFICIAL DUTIES. 
 
3.5.1. Relationship with Political Parties/Association   
i. The  Constitution  of  Ghana  confers  rights  on  all  citizens  of  Ghana,  including Civil  Service 
staff to  join  any  political  party  or  association  of  their  choice.    However,  by virtue  of  the 
traditional  role  of  the  Civil  Service  to  serve  the  Government  of  the  day loyally,  and  to 
maintain the confidence of any future administration, A Civil Service staff shall not:  
a) Accept  any  office  paid  or  unpaid,  permanent  or  temporary,  in  any political  party  or 
organization; 
b) Declare himself openly as a registered member of a political party or association; 
c) Indicate publicly his support for any party, candidate or policy;  
d) Make  speeches  or  join  in  demonstrations  in  favour  of  any  political  person,  party,  or, 
propaganda;  
e) Engage in activities which are likely to involve him in political controversy; 
f) Act in a way that is determined by party political considerations; 
g) Use official resources for party political purposes; 
h) Allow his personal political views to determine his policy advice or actions; Contest for 
elections for political party office or hold political party office. 
ii. A Civil Service staff shall remain politically neutral during his or her term of employment. 
iii. Notwithstanding, A Civil Service staff is entitled to his views in political matters, and, if so 
qualified, may vote at elections.  
 
3.5.2. Relationship with Ministers, Parliament and the Public  
i. Civil Service staff should conduct themselves in accordance with the standards of integrity, 
impartiality  and  honesty  in  their  dealings  with  Ministers,  Parliament  and  the  Public.    They 
should make honest and impartial information relevant to a decision, available to Ministers. 
They should not deceive or knowingly mislead Ministers, Parliament or the Public.  
ii. A  Civil  Service staff must  conduct  himself  in  such  a  way  as  will  deserve  and  retain the 
confidence and trust of his Minister. 
iii. Civil  Service  staff as  agents  of  Government,  shall  limit  themselves  to  the  effective 
dissemination and implementation of Government policies only and not project themselves 
by indicating their specific contribution to policy development.         

18 
 
3.6. PRINCIPLE 6 – ADHERING TO THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC 
LIFE 
3.6.1. Selflessness 
 Civil Service staff should take decisions solely in terms of the public interest.  They should not do 
so in order to gain financial or other material benefit for themselves, their family or their friends.  
3.6.2. Integrity 
Civil  Service  staff should  not  place  themselves  under  any  financial  or  other  obligation  to  any 
individuals or  organizations  that  might  influence  them  in  the  performance  of  their  official  duties, 
including awarding of contracts etc.  
3.6.3. Justice and Fairness 
In  carrying  out  public  business  including  making  public  appointments,  awarding contracts,  or, 
recommending individuals for rewards and benefits, Civil Service staff   should make choices based 
solely on merit.  
3.6.4. Accountability 
Civil  Service  staff shall  be  responsible  to  both  the  Government  (employer)  and  the  public 
(customer)  for  their  decisions  and actions,  and  must  submit  themselves  to  whatever scrutiny  is 
appropriate to their office. 
3.6.5. Transparency:  
Civil  Service  staff should  be  as  open  as  possible  about  all  the  decisions  and actions  that  they  take.  
They should give reasons for their decisions and restrict access to information only when the wider 
public interest clearly demands that the information should not be released.  
3.6.6. Leadership 
Civil  Service  staff should  strive  to  excel  in  all  their  endeavours;  be  an  example  to  others  and 
encourage others to follow their footsteps.  
           3.6.7      Impartiality  
Civil Service staff shall at all times carry out his or her duties with impartiality and neutrality; and not 
practice  favouritism,  nepotism,  tribalism,  cronyism,  religious  bias  or any  other  kind  of  bias  or 
discrimination, or engage in corrupt or unethical practices. 
                     3.6.8 Professionalism 
Civil Service staff shall carry out his or her duties in a manner that protects  the integrity of his office 
and treat members os the public or clients  with courtesy and respect. 
 

19 
 
4.0. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
4.1. Endorsement of Fake Documents  
Civil Service staff should refrain from making false declarations or endorsing forged documents.  At 
any rate, A Civil Service Staff should ascertain the authenticity of any document before endorsing it.  
 
4.2. Personal Appearance (Attire) 
Civil Service staff shall dress appropriately at all times, in conformity with professional, cultural and 
international  accepted  standards  and norms  of  dressing.    An attire  must  not  appear  too  gaudy  or 
shabby so as to draw unfavourable comments from colleagues or the public.  
 
4.3. Acts calculated to bring the Civil Service into disrepute  
Any act by a Civil Service staff which is calculated to bring the Civil Service into disrepute must be 
avoided.  
 
4.4. Exposure of Misconduct  
i. A  Civil  Service staff will  be  expected  to  expose  any  act  of  misconduct,  the  commission  of 
which he knows or ought to have known to be a misconduct.  
ii. A Civil Service staff who believes that he is being required to act in a manner which is illegal, 
improper,  unethical  or  in  breach  of  the  Constitution,  and  which  may  involve  possible 
maladministration,  or  which  is  otherwise  inconsistent  with  the  Civil  Service  Code  of 
Conduct,  or  raises a  fundamental  issue  of conscience,  shall  report  the  matter  in  writing, in 
line with the procedure specified in this Code.  
 
4.5. Offenses not in the Code 
Any  act  of  misconduct  by a Civil  Service staff not  expressly  mentioned  in  this  Code  or  in  any 
regulations operating within the Civil Service shall be reported to the Head of the Civil Service, who 
may, after consultation with the Civil Service Council, issue instructions as to how it should be dealt 
with, and the case shall be dealt with accordingly.  
 
 

20 
 
5.0. REPORTING PROCEDURE  
5.1. The  reporting  procedure  to  be  followed  in  lodging  complaints  or  reports  in  respect  of 
breaches of the code of conduct/work ethic is set forth in the ensuing paragraphs.  
5.2.  Where  there  is  a  breach  of  this  Code  of  Conduct,  a Civil  Service staff may  report  or 
complain to a superior officer or the appropriate authority.  
5.3. Hierarchy of Authority for Lodging Complaint  
 Reports under this Code may be lodged in the following ascending order:  
a) Immediate Supervisor (of officer complained of or complainant)  
b) Chief Director/Head of Department 
c) The Head of Civil Service 
d) The Civil Service Council 
e) Chairman of the Public Services Commission  
f) Chief of Staff 
g) The President/Vice-President  
5.4. Where the Officer to whom the report should be made, is himself involved in the breach 
of the Code, the matter should be reported to the next superior officer.  
5.5. In all cases, the reports should be copied to the Chief Director with responsibility for the 
Ministry/Department, in which the officer being complained about belongs, as well as to 
the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee of the Ministry/Department.  
5.6. The Officer  or  Authority  to  whom  the  report  is  made  shall  indicate  the  action  being 
taken  within  a  period  of  two  weeks  from  the  receipt  of  the  report,  failing  which  the 
complainant may take up the complaint with the next superior authority.  
5.7. Notwithstanding this procedure, any matter which may be considered to be a breach of 
human rights or a case of fraud may be reported to the Office of the Commissioner of 
Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ), the Economic and Organised Crime 
Office (EOCO) and the Office of the Special Prosecutor (OSP) respectively, where it is 
not feasible or practicable to invoke the procedure in this Code.  
 
6.0. DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES/ PENALTIES  
6.1. Disciplinary  procedures set  out  in  the  following  paragraphs  may  be  initiated  against  a 
staff member who fails to comply with the standards of conduct in this Code.  
6.2. Where  a  case  is  proven,  the  Civil  Service  staff may  be  subjected  to  appropriate 
disciplinary or corrective measure.  

21 
 
6.3. Disciplinary procedure for all offences shall be in accordance with the provisions of the 
Civil Service Regulations/Administrative Instructions.  
 
6.4. Officers to be Warned in Writing  
i. Heads  of  Department/Directorates/Units shall  cause  a  warning  in  writing to  be  issued  to 
any Officer whose work or conduct is determined to be unsatisfactory.  In every case where 
an  Officer  has  been  so  warned, the  fact  should  be  so  recorded  by  the  Head  of  the 
Department/Directorate/Unit concerned.  
ii. An  Officer  should  not  be  allowed  to  accumulate not  more  than  three  (3) warnings  and 
censures for acts of misconduct before disciplinary action is taken against him.  
iii. In cases where the misconduct is comparatively minor, action may nevertheless, be taken as 
soon as  it  is  clear  that  the  Officer  is  not  likely  to  respond  to the corrections  and  when 
sufficient evidence is available to warrant proceedings under the Code.  
iv. The conduct of any Civil Service staff which contravenes any paragraph of this Code shall be 
investigated for purposes of discipline.   
 
6.5. Disciplinary Committee  
i. A  Disciplinary  Committee  shall  be  constituted  to  investigate  acts  of  misconduct  under  this 
Code and recommend appropriate disciplinary or corrective measures.  
ii. A Disciplinary Committee shall be constituted in the following manner:  
a. A Senior Officer nominated by the Disciplinary Authority as Chairman.  
b. Representative of a Minstry/Department Local Labour Union and  
c. The  Personnel  Officer  or  an  Officer  acting  in  that  capacity  shall  act  as the 
investigating officer.  
iii. Any  Civil  Service  staff appearing  before  a  Disciplinary  Committee  shall  be  given  every 
opportunity to defend himself and have a right of appeal not more than two weeks after the 
decision.   
iv. The  Committee’s  findings  and  recommendations  shall  be  forwarded  to  the  appropriate 
Disciplinary Authority  
 
6.6. Offences and Misconduct 
i. Offence  or Misconduct  is  any act  done without  reasonable  excuse by a Civil  Service staff 
which amounts to a failure to perform in a proper manner any duty imposed on him as such; 

22 
 
or  which  contravenes  any  enactment  relating  to the  Civil  Service;  or  which  is  otherwise 
prejudicial  to  the  efficient  conduct of  the  Civil  Service; or  tends  to  bring  the  Civil  Service 
into disrepute; constitutes misconduct.” 
ii. For the purposes of this Code, Offences are classified as either, major or minor as defined in 
paragraphs 6.7 and 6.8 respectively.   
 
6.7. Major Offences  
The major Offences shall in general consist of the following:  
 
(a) To  make  unauthorised  disclosure  of  classified  and  unclassified  official  information  or 
document to a private person or to another public officer. 
(b) To  hold  any  political  Office  Paid  or Unpaid  or  to Declare  openly ones  affiliation  or 
membership of  a  political  party Engaging  directly  or  indirectly  in  partisan  political 
activities 
(c) To Sexually harass a colleague officer in Government Offices or anywhere 
(d) To demand, receive or give bribe, or be an agent for any person who intends to influence a 
Civil Service Staff with a bribe. 
(e) To engage in forgery of document(s) in the Office  
(f) To slander or libel another person 
(g) To be Convicted for any offence involving fraud, dishonesty or moral turpitude 
(h) Falsification of official document and or signature  
(i) Violation of existing Civil Service law and rules of serious nature 
(j) Refusal to complete Staff Performance Appraisal for two (2) consecutive years  
 
6.8. Minor Offences 
(a) To be absent from duty without leave or reasonable excuse; irregular or late attendance 
(b) To use, without the consent of the prescribed authority, property or facility provided for the 
purposes of the Service for some purpose not connected with official duties; 
(c) To  engage  in  an  activity  outside  official  duties  which  is  likely  to  lead  to  the  taking  of 
improper advantage of the position in the Service of that civil servant; 
(d) To fail to submit reports or information or both as prescribed under Section 77 of the Civil 
Service Act; 
(e) To use confidential information obtained as a result of public position, for personal gain 
(f) To assault a colleague officer verbally on any Government premises, or in any public place 
to the embarrassment of the Civil Service 
 
 

23 
 
 
 
6.9. Penalties  
i. For  the  purposes  of  this  Code,  penalty  is  classified  as  either,  major  or  minor  as  defined  in 
paragraphs 6.10 and 6.11 respectively. 
ii. Disciplinary  awards  may  involve  the  imposition  of  major  or  minor penalties,  depending  on 
the gravity of the offence/misconduct.  
 
6.10. Major Penalties  
Major penalties shall in general consist of the following disciplinary awards:  
a. Reduction in rank 
b. Removal  from  the  Civil  Service- This  includes the  termination  of  appointments,  with  or 
without a reduction a reduction in retirement benefits, where applicable. 
c. Dismissal – This  includes  the  termination  of  appointment  with  forfeiture  of  retirements 
benefits, excluding statutory retirements if any 
 
6.11. Minor Penalties 
Minor penalties shall in general consist of the following disciplinary awards:  
a. Warning or reprimand  
b. Suspension of increment  
c. Withholding or deferment of increment 
d. Suspension from duty with loss of pay  
e. Reduction in salary  
f. Surcharge 
 
7.0. REWARDS 
An appropriate reward and recognition shall be accorded to A Civil Service Staff who exhibits good 
ethical conduct. The rewards shall include; but not limited to;- 
i. Word of recognition of good performance 
ii. Open praise 
iii. Letter of commendation 

24 
 
iv. Presents 
v. Certificate of merit 
vi. Concessionary trips 
vii. Cash bonuses 
viii. Salary increments 
 
8.0. RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
8.1. Office of the Head of the Civil Service (OHCS) 
i. Ensure the Code is widely publicised and implemented in all Civil Service organizations 
ii. Provide mandatory induction courses in ethics and standards of conduct for new employees  
iii. Ensure  the  Code  is  up  to  date  and  reflects  changes  in  the  public  administration  system  of 
Ghana as well as global trends in public administration.  
iv. Ensure the implementation of sanctions and rewards under the Code  
v. Ensure  that  service  charters  of  Ministries  and  Departments  and  their  dealings  with  clients 
and the general public are in line with the standards of conduct prescribed in the Code.  
 
8.2. Ministries and Departments  
i. Provide periodic training in ethics and standards of conduct to staff  
ii. Educate staff on their personal responsibilities under the Code 
iii. Establish a committee to implement the Code and handle other related matters 
iv. Educate, monitor and evaluate the performance of the Committee 
v. Provide  the  necessary support for  staff  to  give  effect  to  the  Punctuality  Pledge  in  the  Civil 
Service. 
 

25 
 
9.0. DEFINITION OF KEY CONCEPTS  
Advantage-Includes gift, loan, reward, commission, employment or contract, service or favour and 
exercise of right or power. 
Classified Information- Includes information marked or determined as “top secret”, “secret”, 
“confidential” and “restricted”, which when disclosed to an unauthorised person may cause harm to 
the   nation   or   institution. The Right   to   Information   Act,   2019, (ACT 989)  provides the 
implementation of the constitutional right to information held by a public institution that are subject 
to exemptions. 
Conduct - Conduct in this context, is behaviour, attitudes, and character exhibited, for example, by 
any one within and outside the working environment. The standards of conduct generally required 
of  any  member  of  the  Civil  Service  would  be  leadership,  selflessness,  competence,  integrity, 
impartiality, fairness and honesty in matters affecting work and status in society.  
Conflict  of  Interest-Refers  to  a  situation  where A  Civil  Service  Staff’s personal interest conflicts 
with or is likely to conflict with the functions of his office. 
Corruption: Misuse of a public position for direct or indirect personal gain. 
He/His:     Refers to both Male and Female Civil Service Staff 
Gift- Any  present,  donation,  grant  or  favour  whether  monetary  or  in  kind  or  any  other  gain  of a 
personal nature given as an appreciation after a service has been rendered. 
Influence Peddling – The practice of soliciting some form of benefit in exchange for the exercise 
of one’s official authority or influence. 
Non-Public  Information-Information  that A  Civil  Service  Staff gains by reason of the servant’s 
employment  and  which  the  public  officer  knows or reasonably  ought  to  know  has  not  been  made 
available to the general public nor has been authorised to be made available to the public on request. 
Professionalism – High standard (performance) expected from a person well trained in a particular 
job.  
Self-dealing – A situation where one takes an action in an official capacity which involves dealing 
with oneself in a private capacity and which confers or is likely to confer benefit to oneself.   
Misconduct - Misconduct  in  this  Code  as  defined  in  Section  76  of the  Civil  Service  Law  1993 
(PNDCL 327) viz:  
(i) “Any act done by A Civil Service Staff without reasonable cause which:  
(a) Amounts to a failure to perform in a proper manner any duty imposed on him; or  
(b) Contravenes any enactment relating to the Civil Service; or   
(c) Otherwise is prejudicial to the efficient conduct of the functions of the Civil Service; or  
(d) Tends to bring the Civil Service into disrepute; constitutes misconduct.”  

26 
 
(ii) “For the avoidance of doubt, the conviction  of A  Civil Service  Staff for  any  offence  involving 
fraud, dishonesty or moral turpitude, tends to bring the Civil Service into disrepute.”  
 
Particular types of misconduct will include the following:  
(a) to be absent from duty without leave or reasonable excuse, 
(b) to be insubordinate, 
(c) to be intoxicated during office hours, 
(d)  to  use,  without  the  consent  of  the  prescribed  authority,  property  or  facility  provided  for  the 
purposes of the Service for some purpose not connected with official duties, 
(e)  to  engage  in  a gainful  occupation  outside  the  Service  without  the  consent  of  the  prescribed 
authority, 
(f)  to  engage  in  an  activity  outside  official  duties  which  is likely  to  lead  to  the  taking  of  improper 
advantage of the position in the Service of that civil servant, 
(g) to fail to submit reports or information or both as prescribed under this Act, 
(h) to make unauthorised disclosure of classified and unclassified official information or document 
to a private person or to another public officer. 
 
 
 
Made this 1
st
 Day of November, 2022 
.......................................... 
Nana Kwasi Agyekum-Dwamena 
Head of the Civil Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
SCHEDULE  1 
REGISTER OF DECLARATION OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST (TEMPLATE) 
NAME OF MINISTRY/DEPARTMENT............................................................................... 
TRANSACTION/NAME OF CONTRACT: ......................................................... 
Name of 
Officer 
Date Conflict is 
Recorded 
Business  under 
Transaction 
Nature of 
Conflict 
Decision Made 
on Participation 
officer 
Signature of 
Officer Making 
Declaration