ORIENTATION FOR NEWLY RECRUITED 
OFFICERS OF THE GHANA CIVIL SERVICE
RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE GHANA 
CIVIL SERVICE
A presentation 
By William Kartey

Training objectives
To expose participants to some important rules and regulations in 
the Civil Service.
To equip participants with some key provisions of the Civil Service 
Code of Conduct.

Learning outcome
At the end of the session, participants will be able to:
Effectively apply the Rules and Regulations in their workplaces
Identify gaps in the Rules and Regulations and the Code of Conduct 
and suggest solutions

INTRODUCTION
•The Civil Service, like all Organisationshas its rules, regulations and 
Code to govern the conduct of its officers.
•Set standards for compliance by its employees. 
•The rules and regulations were developed by the colonial 
Government and embodied in the time-honouredGold Coast General 
Orders. 
•These Orders, together with the Civil Service {interim} 
Regulations{1960} constituted the main source of authority and 
direction for the running of the Civil Service machinery.

INTRODUCTION
The Rules And Regulations:
Cover wide areas i.e. from recruitment to exiting the Service
They were originally contained in the Civil Service {interim} 
Regulations{1960} but have over time been added to, through the 
issuing of circulars, guidelines, directives by the PSC, OHCS, Office of 
the President, MOF, to address the inadequacies in the 1960 
Regulations.   

Appointments
Qualifications:
No person shall be appointed to the Civil Service unless he/she 
possesses the qualification approved for entry to that post. To apply 
this principle/rule effectively, we need to ensure that: 
(a) Job opportunities are known about and publicized;
(b) Selection is fair and objective at each stage;
(c) Those appointed have the necessary skills and competencies for the job;
(d) the best candidate is chosen for the job

Appointments
Appointment of convicted persons:
No person who has been convicted of a criminal offence involving fraud, 
dishonesty or moral turpitude shall be employed in a Civil service post.
Probation:
(1) An appointment by recruitment to a Civil Service post shall be subject to 
satisfactory service in that post for a probationary period of one year:
Trial:
(2) An appointment by promotion to a Civil Service post shall be subject to 
satisfactory service in that post for a trial period of one year. 

Appointments
All appointments to posts in the Civil Service shall be subject 
to the medical fitness of the candidate. 
The medical examination shall be carried out either by a 
Government Medical Officer or by a Medical Officer designated 
by the Ministry of Health.
The effective date of appointment of a Civil Servant shall be 
determined as follows:-

Appointments
(a)For a person, recruited in Ghana, the date of his assumption 
of duty.
(b)For a person recruited outside Ghana, the date of embarkation 
to assume duty provided he travels as directed.
The appointment Authority shall, issue a formal letter of 
appointment specifying the following:-

Appointments
(a)Date of appointment;
(b)Probationary period;
(c)Other terms/conditions applicable to the appointment.
Heads of Departments shall notify the appointing authority of 
the date of assumption of duty of the officer.
On completion of probation and subject to satisfactory work 
and conduct an officer may be confirmed in his grade. 

Appointments
When the date of birth declared by the candidate on first 
appointment to the Civil Service has been accepted and entered into 
record, it cannot be subsequently be amended.
When a candidate knows the year of his birth but not the month, he 
will be deemed to have been born on the 1
st
July. When he knows the 
month but not the day, he will be deemed to have been born on the 
16
th
of that month.

Promotions 
Definition:
The act of raising an employee's status or grade, usually with an increase 
in the level of the responsibility.
Requirements:
Promotions must be conferred only when vacancies exist and the officer 
has satisfied all the necessary requirements for promotions laid down in 
the relevant Scheme of Service and Guidelines for Appointments and 
Promotions.
Where an officer displays exceptional qualities of efficiency, hard-work, 
brilliance and potential for higher responsibility he\she may be considered 
for promotion out of turn.

Promotions 
(b) Recommendation For Promotion:
vacancy position 
seniority list 
staff performance appraisal report 
scheme of service
(c) Methods
Assessment interview 
Result of prescribed examination 
Assessment of qualifications

Code of conduct
General Requirements:
(1)Every Civil Servant shall show loyalty to the State, the Government and 
the Civil Service.
(2) Every Civil Servant shall discharge diligently all duties and tasks allocated 
to him/her with the aim of achieving the objectives thereof.
(3) A Civil Servant shall not put him\herse!f, famiIyor friends In a position 
where his\her or their Interest conflicts with the functions of his/her 
office.
(4) A Civil Servant is prohibited from receiving valuable gifts (other than the 
ordinary gifts of personal friends) whether in the shape of money, 
goods, hospitality or other personal benefits, if he has reason to believe 
that the gifts received are intended to influence his judgment or action 
on a case he is dealing with or will handle in the future.
5)It is equally reprehensible for a Civil Servant to give a gift to influence the 
judgment or action of another person in his favour

Code of conduct
General Requirements (contd.):
(6) No Civil Servant shall employ for private purposes, the services of other
Government Officers or employees during hours of duty, nor shall he make 
use of materials, stores or equipment which are the property of the State, 
except with the approval of the Head of the 
Ministry\Department\Region\District.
In such cases, services which may involve the use of government property 
may be rendered by government employees within the official working 
hours for the convenience of members of the public, including Civil 
Servants, in return for a charge to be paid into the consolidated fund
(7) No Civil Servant shall in his\her capacity act as agent for any member of 
the public nor receive any payment from public funds on behalf of any 
member of the public

Code of conduct
(8) No Civil Servant shall engage in business or any commercial undertaking and on 
appointment, he\she shall declare to his\her appointing authority his\her 
interest in any business or commercial undertaking. If after appointment and in 
the course of his\her career he\she wishes to undertake any such business, 
he\she shall first obtain clearance from his\her Head of Department
(9) All Civil Servants are required, subject to the exigencies of the Service, to work a 
minimum of 35 and a maximum of 45 hours per week, in accordance with 
International LabourOrganisationconvention.
Hours of work:
(10) Except when regulated by statute or where permission has been given by the 
Appointing Authority, the hours of attendance of public officers are:
Monday-8.00am-12.30pm
1.30pm-5.00pm

Code of conduct
Participation In Unofficial Activities During
Office Hours:
(11) Request for the release of Civil Servants at all levels to enable 
them to take part in unofficial activities during normal hours of work 
or for the adjustment of normal hours of work for the purpose shall 
be submitted to the respective Minister or Head of Civil Service at 
least 3 days (i.e. 72 hours) in advance before the event takes place.

Code of conduct
Attendance Register:
(12) An attendance Register designed to suit the Iocalrequirements of 
the office concerned shall be kept in every office. Every Civil Servant 
shall enter his\her name daily and shall place against it the time of 
his\her arrival and his/her departure from the office. This book shall 
be examined and initialed weekly by an officer delegated by the Head 
of Department.

Code of conduct
Permission for absence from Duty:
(13) No Civil Servant may leave the office during office hours without 
permission. An officer leaving the office must inform a responsible officer 
where he/she can be located for his\her recall in an emergency.
(14) A Civil Servant who absents him\herself from duty on grounds of ill-
health without being certified by a Government Medical Officer or a 
Doctor or a registered Herbalist recognisedby the Ministry of Health may 
have an appropriate disciplinary action taken against him/her in 
accordance with the Administrative Instruments.
(15)A Civil Servant may not leave Ghana without permission from the Head 
of the Civil Service or Head of Department as the case may be.

Code of conduct
Unauthorized disclosure of official
information/document:
(16)Official correspondence or records must not be shown or produced or 
copies communicated to a private person without the express permission 
of the Head of Department or an officer in the senior grade to whom 
authority is delegated.
(17) Where in the opinion of a Civil Servant, the contents of any 
correspondence or record are prejudicial to the interest of the Civil Service 
and the people of Ghana, he\she shall draw the attention of his/her Head 
of Department to them. The Head of Department shall study the contents 
of the records and initiate whatever action he\she considers necessary

Code of conduct
Broadcast And Lectures:
Civil Servants are encouraged to write articles or make public speeches 
within their fields of competence after necessary clearance from their 
Sector Minister or Head of Civil Service, has been obtained.
A Civil Servant shall not without the express permission of the Head of 
Civil Service, act as editor of any newspaper, magazine or periodicals or 
take part directly or indirectly in the management, thereof, nor publish in 
any manner anything which may reasonably be regarded as of political 
nature.
This provision does not affect any Civil Servant who is required as part of 
his\her official duties to edit any paper or subscribe articles thereto.

Code of conduct
No officer, unless specifically authorized, shall communicate either 
directly or indirectly to the press or to any unauthorised persons any 
information which he\she may have gained in the course of his\her 
official duty.
An officer who wishes to give a lecture or a broadcast talk must first 
obtain authority from his\her Head of Department and clear the 
substance of his\her paper with the Head of Department.

Code of conduct
Misconduct:
Any act done without reasonable excuse by a Civil Servant which 
amounts to a failure to perform in a proper manner any duty 
imposed upon him/her as such, or which contravenes any enactment 
relating to the Civil Service, or which is otherwise prejudicial to the 
efficient conduct of the Civil Service or tends to bring the Civil Service 
into disrepute shall constitute misconduct. 
For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that the conviction 
of a Civil Servant for any offence tends to bring the Civil Service into 
disrepute.

Code of conduct
Types of Misconduct:
It is Misconduct for a Civil Servant:
(a) to be absent from duty without leave or reasonable excuse;
(b) to be insubordinate;
(c) to use without the consent of the prescribed authority any property or facilities 
provided for the Civil Service, for some purpose not connected with his/her 
official duties.
(d) to engage in any activity outside his/her official duties which is likely to lead to 
his\her taking improper advantage of his/her position in the Civil Service;
(e) to engage in any gainful occupation outside the Civil Service without the 
consent of the prescribed authority.
(f) to fail to submit reports/information as prescribed under Section 77 of the Civil 
Service law 1993, PNDCL327

Code of conduct
Penalties:
(a) dismissal, that is termination of appointment with forfeiture of all 
retirement benefits;
(b) removal,that is termination of appointment with or without a 
reduction in retirement benefits;
(c) Reduction in rank, that is removal to another grade with an 
immediate reduction of salary;
(d) reduction of salary, that is an immediate adjustment of salary to a 
lower point on the salary scale attached to the post in question;
(e) deferment of increment, that is a postponement of the date on 
which the next increment is due, with corresponding postponements 
in subsequent years

Code of conduct
(f) Stoppage of increment, that is nonpayment for a specified period of 
an increment otherwise due;
(g) In the case of persons holding category ‘D' posts, suspension from 
dutywith consequent loss of pay and allowances for a period not 
exceeding fourteen days;
(h) Warning;
(i) Reprimand.

Code of conduct
A Head of Department shall cause a warning, in writing, to be 
conveyed to any officer with whose work or conduct he/she has 
reason to be dissatisfied. In every case where an officer has been so 
warned the fact should be recorded in his\her Service Record Card.
Except in the case of gross misconduct. no disciplinary proceedings 
are to be commenced against an officer unless he\she has previously 
had a final warning.
Normally the final warning will itself have been preceded by at least 
one formal disciplinary warning but a final warning may be given to 
an officer with no previous disciplinary record if the misconduct to 
which the warning related is of a really serious nature.

Code of conduct
Petitions:
Petitions include any appeal against a decision of an officer having 
authority to make decision affecting another officer must bear the 
name, signature and the address of the petitioner. When it has been 
written by a person other than the petitioner, the signature and 
address of the writer must be included.
Petitions submitted on behalf of other persons will not be 
entertained unless the author can show that he\she had been 
authorisedto write on those persons' behalf.
Petitions are liable to be returned by the officer to whom they are 
first submitted, if they:

Code of conduct
Petitions (contd.):
(a) deal with cases in which legal proceedings are pending;
(b) are illegible, unintelligible, or worded in abusive or improper language.
A petition must be submitted through the petitioner’s immediate 
supervisor
Petitions submitted otherwise than in this way will be returned to the 
sender. When copies are sent direct to the Appointing Authority, they will 
be treated as having been sent for information only.

Code of conduct
if however the Appointing Authority does not receive a response to 
the petition from the immediate supervisor or Head of Department 
within a month, the Appointing Authority shall intervene.
Where a petitioner has previously been in Government Service and 
the substance of his/her petition refers to such service, it is in his\her 
interest that he\she should comply with the rules applicable to 
serving officers.

•END OF PRESENTATION
•QUESTIONS ?