i 
 
THE GHANA CIVIL SERVICE 
 
 
 
 
WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH RESPONSE 
STRATEGY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
      
 
 

ii 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The  Office  of  the  Head  of  the  Civil  Service  acknowledges the  efforts  of  all  individuals and 
organizations who contributed to the development of this document. It is important to mention the 
Ministry of Employment and Labour Relations, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Education, Ministry 
of  Health  (Ghana  Health  Service),  Department  of  Factories  Inspectorate,) and  the  Reforms 
Coordinating Unit, OHCS for their enormous support in the preparation of the document. We also 
acknowledge the inputs  from  the Civil  Service  Committee  on  Administrative Reforms towards  the 
finalization of the document. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
FOREWORD 
The outbreak of the novel Coronavirus also known as COVID-19 caught the entire nation and the 
Ghana Civil Service in particular unawares. The Ghana Civil Service, therefore, had to deal with the 
challenges  imposed  by  the  outbreak  unprepared  and  on  the  spur of  the  moment.  The  immediate 
response  to  the  pandemic  was the  issuance  of  circulars  to  managers  of  the  Civil  Service  to  adopt 
flexible work arrangements and ensure social distancing at meetings, workshops and seminars. The 
circulars were also to help curtail the spread of the COVID-19 at the workplace.  
As a result of the unpreparedness of the Service to deal with the pandemic, it had to depend on and 
react  to  directives  issued  by  the WHO  and  the Office  of  the  President.  Many  of  the  flexible  work 
arrangements  imposed  by  organizations  of  the  Civil  Service  were  not supported  by  any  IT 
arrangements to ensure that staff continued to work from home. This resulted in a massive loss of 
working  hours  and considerable inactivity  in  the  Civil  Service.  For  many in  the Civil  Service,  the 
staff  rotation  schedules  imposed  by  the  organizations  were  synonymous with holidays.  Supervisors 
also had the challenge of following up on work assignments due to unstable and unreliable internet 
connectivity. In view of these challenges, among others, organizations in the Civil Service are behind 
schedule  in  the  implementation  of  their annual work  plans.  This  impacts  negatively on  service 
delivery to the general public. The Civil Service has learnt its lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic 
and intends to put in place proactive measures (including a business continuity plan) to turn the tide 
in the event of future outbreaks of public health threats such as COVID-19.  
The  Ghana  Civil  Service  Workplace  Safety  and Health  Response Strategy (WSHRS) has  therefore 
been developed as a proactive framework to provide guidelines to Civil Service organizations for the 
management of public health threats at the workplace. This is to ensure that such outbreaks do not 
interfere unduly with service delivery to the general public in circumstances similar to COVID-19. 
I  take  this  opportunity  to  entreat  workers,  clients,  visitors  and  management  of  all  Civil  Service 
Organizations to  implement  the recommendations  outlined in this Strategy to make  the workplace 
safe and guarantee continuity of work at all times. 
 
NANA AGYEKUM DWAMENA 

iv 
 
Table of Contents 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ................................................................................................................................. ii 
FOREWORD .................................................................................................................................................. iii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................. vi 
LIST OF ACRONYMS ..................................................................................................................................... vii 
1.0. Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 1 
2.0. Background ....................................................................................................................................... 1 
3.0. Objectives of this Strategy ................................................................................................................ 2 
4.0. Applicability ....................................................................................................................................... 2 
5.0. Relevant Legislation and National Policies ....................................................................................... 2 
6.0. Conceptual Framework ..................................................................................................................... 3 
7.0. Workplace Health Risk Assessment and Profile ................................................................................ 4 
8.0. Roles and Responsibilities ................................................................................................................. 5 
9.0. Practical Prevention and Mitigation Measures or Protocols ............................................................ 5 
9.1. Maintenance of Social and Physical Distancing ............................................................................ 6 
9.2. Flexible Work Arrangements and Digitization of Operational Procedures .................................. 6 
9.2.1. Staff Rotation/ Flexible Working Arrangements ....................................................................... 6 
9.2.2. Digitization of Operational Procedures..................................................................................... 7 
9.3. Practicing Good Hygiene and Waste Management at the Workplace ............................................. 7 
9.4. Office Ventilation and Use of Air-conditioners ................................................................................. 8 
9.5. Provision and Use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) ........................................................... 8 
9.6. Establishing Organizational Facilities for Quarantine ....................................................................... 9 
9.7. Awareness Creation, Communication and Training ......................................................................... 9 
9.8. Social Protection and Livelihood Support Schemes ........................................................................ 10 
10.0. Key Assumptions ......................................................................................................................... 10 
11.0. Financing the Strategy ................................................................................................................ 11 
12.0. Implementation Plan: Ghana Civil Service Workplace Safety and Health Response Strategy ... 12 
13.0. Monitoring and Evaluation ......................................................................................................... 21 
14.0. Review of the strategy document ............................................................................................... 22 
15.0. Conclusion ................................................................................................................................... 22 
ANNEX 1: ROLES AND RESPONSIBLITIES OF STAKEHOLDERS...................................................................... 23 

v 
 
ANNEX 2: STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................ 27 

vi 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
This Civil Service Workplace Safety and Health Response Strategy (WSHRS) has been developed to 
give impetus to existing legislations, national policies and international protocols for the promotion 
and  enforcement  of  safety  standards  and  public  health  measures  in the  event  of  emergencies.  The 
Strategy has  the objective of protecting workers,  clients  and  persons  who  visit  Civil  Service 
organizations during the   outbreak   of   public   health emergencies.  The Strategy also  aims  at 
minimizing  disruptions  whiles  ensuring  continuity  of service  delivery  in  the  event  of  public  health 
outbreaks such as COVID-19.  
The Strategy takes  into  account  lessons  learnt  in  efforts at  addressing the challenges  posed  by 
COVID-19. The Strategy empowers  the  management  of  organizations  in  the Civil  Service  to 
develop  organization-specific  safety  and  health  profiles  and  identify  risks  generally  associated  with 
their work. These safety and health profiles should be subjected to the specific nature of any public 
health  threat  that  may  arise  at  the workplace. Depending on  the  nature  of  the  outbreak, the  risk 
levels of Ministries and Departments should be determined and categorized for appropriate action. 
This  determination  is  expected  to  be  done  through  a  risk  assessment that should be  conducted  by 
professionals. 
The  results  of  the  risk  assessment should then inform  Service-Wide  Workplace  Safety  and  Health 
Response work plans to be developed and implemented by the Institutions. Such work plans should 
contain specific activities to be carried out in terms of sensitization for workers, clients and visitors. 
They should also  inform  the procurement  and  distribution  of  personal  protective  equipment, 
implementation  of  flexible  work  arrangements,  social  and  physical  distancing,  the  establishment  of 
facilities for holding rooms and quarantine etc. 
This  Strategy requires  the  commitment  of  management,  workers,  clients  and  visitors  for  effective 
implementation and achievement of the strategic objectives. 
 
 

vii 
 
LIST OF ACRONYMS 
 
AIDS       Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
CSO                                Civil Service Organization 
DFI                                 Department of Factories Inspectorate 
DPs                                 Development Partners 
GHS                                Ghana Health Service 
IEC                                 Information Education and Communication 
MD                                  Ministry and Department 
MERS       Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 
MOC                               Ministry of Communication 
MOGCSP                       Ministry of Gender Children and Social Protection                              
MOH                              Ministry of Health 
H1N1       Hemagglutinin 1 Neuraminidases 1 
NGO                               Non-Governmental Organization 
NITA                              National Information Technology Agency 
OHCS                             Office of the Head of the Civil Service 
PPE                                 Personal Protective Equipment 
SARS       Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
WSHRS                          Workplace Safety and Health Response Strategy 
                             
 
 
 
 

1 
 
1.0. Introduction 
The  Ghana  Civil  Service  is  the  main  agency  through  which  the  Executive  arm  of  Government 
operates in  the  country.  In  accordance  with  article  190  of  the  1992  Constitution,  the  Civil  Service 
forms part of the Public Services of Ghana. The Civil Service Law, 1993 (PNDCL 327) establishes 
the Ghana Civil Service to perform a strategic function in supporting the government to formulate 
and implement policies for national development through its Ministries and Departments. 
The  Civil  Service  Act,  PNDCL 327 also establishes  the  Office  of the  Head  of the Civil  Service 
(OHCS) as  a Central Management  Agency  for  the  entire  Civil Service. As  part  of  the OHCS 
functions to review and facilitate the implementation of human resource policies and guidelines, the 
Ghana Civil Service Workplace Safety and Health Response Strategy has been developed.  
The WSHRS will   serve   as   a   proactive   framework   to   provide   guidelines   to Ministries   and 
Departments for  the  management  of  safety  and  health  responses to  emerging  threats at  the 
workplace. The  Civil  Service  is  committed  to  providing  a  safe  working  environment  for  all  its 
employees  and  clients  from public  health  threats and also to ensure  that  outbreaks  such  as  the 
COVID-19 pandemic do not interfere unduly with productivity and service delivery. 
2.0. Background 
Throughout history, pandemics and epidemics have ravaged the world in varying degrees. They have 
occasionally changed the course of history for better or for worse. Such diseases include the Circa of 
China  (3000  BC),  the  plague  of  Athens  (430  BC), the  Bubonic  Plague  (541 AD)  and  the  Antonine 
plague  of  the  Roman  Empire.  In  more  recent  times  we  have  had  the  Black  Death  (1346)  which 
killed  half  the  population  of  Europe,  the  flu  pandemic  (1889),  the  Spanish  Flu  (1918), Acquired 
Immune  Deficiency  Syndrome  (AIDS), Severe  Acute  Respiratory  Syndrome  (SARS), Middle  East 
Respiratory  Syndrome  (MERS), Hemagglutinin  1  Neuraminidass 1 (H1N1),  Ebola,  Zika  etc.  The 
Spanish  Flu  in  particular  affected  about five hundred million  (500million)  people  and  a  substantial 
number  lost  their  lives.    Pandemics  and  epidemics  are  therefore  dreaded  diseases  that  have  the 
potential of causing havoc to humanity and must be handled with the seriousness they deserve. 
Most,  unfortunately,  are hard  to  predict  with  accuracy  as they  mostly  strike  unexpectedly. This 
Strategy has   therefore   been developed   to   serve   as   a   standardized   framework   to   guide   all 
organizations of the   Ghana   Civil   Service in   the planning,   preparation,   implementation  and 

2 
 
monitoring of interventions or  protocols  to  prevent  and/contain  public  health emergencies.  The 
Strategy provides standardized provisions or recommended courses of action to mitigate the impact 
of pandemics/epidemics on service delivery in the Civil Service. 
3.0. Objectives of this Strategy 
The objects of this Strategy are to: 
1. Protect workers of the Ghana Civil Service and their families, clients and visitors in the event 
of any public health threat. 
2. Contain the  spread  of  any  public  health  threat  within  the  machinery  of  the  Ghana  Civil 
Service. 
3. Manage disruptions to service delivery, maintain productivity and client satisfaction. 
4. Provide rehabilitation, social protection and livelihood support to victims and their families 
or dependents.   
5. Address issues of stigmatization     
4.0. Applicability 
This Strategy applies to all organizations in the Ghana Civil Service. 
It  provides  systems  and  processes  that  Civil  Service  organisations  are  required  to  put  in  place  to 
mitigate the effects of Public Health Threats.   
5.0. Relevant Legislation and National Policies 
The following are the relevant existing laws and policy frameworks that support the objects of this 
Strategy: 
1. The 1992 Constitution  
2. The Civil Service Law, 1993 (PNDCL 327)  
3. Factories, Offices and Shops Act, 1970 (Act 328) 
4. Labour Act, 2003 (Act 651) 
5. Public Health Act, 2012 (Act 851) 
6. Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1987 (PNDCL 187) 
7. Right to Information ACT, 2019 (Act 989) 

3 
 
8. National Employment Policy, 2015 
9. Ghana National Social Protection Policy, 2016 
10. National Gender Strategy, 2015  
11. Disability Act, 2006 (715) 
These laws and policy frameworks make broad provisions for the maintenance of safe and healthy 
environments  at  the  workplace  and  the  delivery  of  support  to  cushion  those  who  fall  victim to 
workplace risks and hazards. 
6.0. Conceptual Framework 
Figure 1: Civil Service Workplace Safety & Health Response Cycle 
 
Figure  1  shows  that  Civil  Service  organizations will have  to  develop  specific  organizational  Health 
and  Safety  Profiles  that  identify  general  risks  and  hazards  in  the  event  of  an  outbreak  of  a  health 
threat based on the peculiar work processes and arrangements that exist. In  the event of a specific 
outbreak,  a  risk  assessment should be  conducted  by  a health  and  safety  professional  taking  into 
consideration  the  nature  of  the  outbreak,  work  processes,  structure  of  the  workplace, and  age 
distribution  of  staff,  the  general  health  status  of  staff  and  their  level  of  resistance  as  well  as  the 
potential impact on service delivery. 

4 
 
The  identified  risks should be  categorized  on a scale  of  low  to  high  risks.  Based  on  the  risk 
assessment  report,  a  specific  work plan  to  guide  the  implementation  of  general  and  specific 
measures  or  protocols should be  developed  to  contain  the  spread,  prevent  further  transmission, 
provide  rehabilitation  support,  extend  social  protection  support  to  victims  and  their  families/ 
dependents  and  maintain  service  delivery.  In  the  course  of  implementing  these  measures,  they 
should  be  monitored, evaluated,  reviewed  and  lessons  incorporated  into  the  organizational  health 
and safety profiles. 
7.0. Workplace Health Risk Assessment and Profile 
To foresee and anticipate possible risks or threats to health and safety at the workplace and develop 
an appropriate  response,  organizations  in  the  Ghana  Civil  Service  should  undertake  organization-
specific  health  and  safety  profiles  which  should 
be updated periodically. 
The  purpose  of  the  organization-specific  health 
and  safety  profiles  is  to  document  risks  and 
hazards   that   make   a   specific   Civil   Service 
organization  susceptible  to  the  outbreak  of  a 
public health threat.  
The   organization-specific   health   and   safety 
profiles should identify risks and hazards within 
Ministries and Departments and categorize them 
on a scale of low to high risk for the attention of 
management, workers and other stakeholders. 
Organizations  in  the  Ghana  Civil  Service  should  prepare  and  update  their  workplace  health  and 
safety profiles by conducting risk assessments. The risk assessments should be done by a health and 
safety  expert  or  professional  with  considerable  experience  in  the  area.  The  risk  assessment  should 
consider the following, among others: 
i. work processes and procedures,  
ii. ergonomics and physical hazards 
iii. production lines and value chains,  
Box 1: Categorization of risks 
High  risk: Workers  in  this  category  are 
those  who  come  into  contact  with  known, 
unknown  or  suspected  sources  of  threat 
very frequently and can easily contract and 
transmit to others. 
Medium  risk: Workers  in  this  category 
are   those   who   come   into   contact   with 
known,  unknown  or  suspected  sources  of 
threat    less    frequently    but    can    easily 
contract and transmit to others. 
Low risk: Workers in this category seldom 
come  into  contact  with  known,  unknown 
or  suspected  sources  of  threat  and  may 
contract and transmit to others. 
 

5 
 
iv. Chemicals used in the workplace for cleaning and disinfection. 
v. mode of workers’ transportation to and from the workplace, 
vi. residential areas of workers,  
vii. categories of workers at the workplace, 
viii. contact with clients and visitors,  
ix. the age group of workers, 
x. health status/conditions of workers and their resistance to the threat, 
xi. travel history of workers, clients and visitors, 
xii. Hygiene and waste management practices of the organization. 
The health and safety profiles should serve as blueprints for the development and implementation of 
workplace health and safety work plans. 
8.0. Roles and Responsibilities 
The development and implementation of a Workplace Safety and Health Response work plan is the 
responsibility of management and workers in the Civil Service. Clients and other visitors of the Civil 
Services  should  play  complementary  roles  by  supporting  and  complying  with  the  measures  or 
protocols  that  should  be  instituted  by  Civil  Service  organizations  in  response  to  health  and 
workplace safety during emergencies similar. 
The roles and responsibilities of stakeholders are depicted in annex 1 
 
9.0. Practical Prevention and Mitigation Measures or Protocols 
All Civil Service organisations must designate health and safety focal person(s) for training in basic 
emergency measures.  Such  persons  will  serve  as  the  first  point  of  contact  for  workers  of  the 
organisation in emergency health situations. In the event of an outbreak of a public health threat at 
any Civil Service organization, persons suspected to be infected must be sent to an already identified 
holding room for quarantine while awaiting the arrival of professional health personnel. Thereafter, 
management,  workers,  clients  and  visitors  of  that  organization should comply  with  the  following 
standardized protocols: 

6 
 
9.1. Maintenance of Social and Physical Distancing 
Management  of  Civil  Service  organizations  should 
impose  social  and  physical  distancing  measures in 
line  with  the  Ministry  of  Health/Ghana  Health 
Service guidelines. This  includes  suspension  of  all 
"in-person"   meetings,   staff   durbars,   workshops 
and   training   that   are   usually   organized   at   the 
workplace.  
After an initial assessment has been conducted and 
the   nature   of   the   threat   has   been   identified, 
analyzed and understood, an appropriate 
mandatory  social/physical  distancing  between  staff,  visitors  and  clients  may  be  imposed  to  enable 
continuous interaction and service delivery. 
 
9.2. Flexible Work Arrangements and Digitization of Operational Procedures 
In  line  with the  social  and  physical  distancing  measures  imposed  at  the  workplace,  management 
should also consider and implement non-traditional or flexible working arrangements to enable staff 
to comply strictly with the social and physical distancing measures. This includes: 
9.2.1. Staff Rotation/ Flexible Working Arrangements 
The  objective  is  to  reduce  the  number  of  workers  at  the  workplace  and  specifically  in  the  various 
offices  at  a  particular  point  in  time. 
Depending  on  the size  of  the offices, 
rooms with   more   than   two   (2) 
workers could adopt  a  staff  rotation 
schedule  that  should  ensure  that  not 
more  than  two  (2)  workers  are  in  the 
office     at     any     point     in     time. 
Social/physical   distancing   measures 
must    be respected    at    all    times. 
Depending     on     the     nature of 
Box 3: What are the Staff Rotation and Flexible Work 
Arrangement? 
Staff  rotation  is  a  technique  used  by  some  managers  to 
reshuffle  workers  on  duty  within  particular  periods  and 
in-between  working  hours. Flexible work arrangement 
refers  to  work  schedules  that  allow  workers  to  choose 
where they do their work, when to start work and when to 
finish within some agreed periods. This allows workers to 
work outside the traditional working environment without 
stress. Typically, workers choose to work from home. 
Box 2: What is Social/Physical Distancing? 
In  public  health,  social  distancing,  also  called 
physical    distancing,    is    a    set    of    non-
pharmaceutical    interventions    or    measures 
intended  to  prevent  the  spread  of  a  contagious 
disease   by   maintaining   a   physical   distance 
between  people  and  reducing  the  number  of 
times people come into close contact with each 
other. 

7 
 
operations and the calibre of  the workers  in  question (whether  top,  middle, senior  management  or 
operational staff and the workload of the organization), staff rotation working arrangements may be 
adopted. 
Variations of the staff  rotation  arrangement  may  also  be  adopted  by  the  same  Civil  Service 
organization depending  on exigencies  of  specific  departments,  agencies,  directorates,  divisions  or 
units. 
The staff rotation arrangements or flexible working hours should be imposed to reduce the negative 
impact of the health threat on organizational productivity and service delivery. 
Management and supervisors should ensure that workers who are rotated in-between working hours 
are  assigned  to  work  as  required  during  normal  working  hours  and  effectively  supervised  through 
ICT and digitized platforms. 
 
9.2.2. Digitization of Operational Procedures 
In  anticipation of future  outbreaks  and  in  line  with  existing  social/physical  distancing  protocols, 
organizations  in  the  Civil  Service  should  take  steps  to  steadily  invest  in  the  digitization  of  work 
processes and procedures. This is also to support flexible work arrangements that may be imposed 
in the event of an outbreak of a public health threat in any organization of the Service. 
 
9.3. Practicing 
Good 
Hygiene and 
Waste 
Management 
at the 
Workplace 
In  the  event  of  an  outbreak 
similar to COVID-19, 
organizations  in   the   Ghana 
Civil   Service should ensure 
Box 4: 11 Tips of Good Workplace Hygiene  
1. Place hand sanitizers and soaps in washroom and vantage 
points to encourage the culture of handwashing. 
2. Ensure the provision of running water 
3. Set up a schedule for regular cleaning. 
4. Clean and open windows to allow in good levels of 
natural light. 
5. Set up a waste disposal system. 
6. Clean communal areas regularly. 
7. Organize regular hygiene and safety talks. 
8. Allow workers sick days off. 
9. Ensure clean air at all times. 
10. Provide protective clothing to staff depending on the 
nature of the task. 
11. Address hygiene problems quickly. 
 

8 
 
that consumables and good hygiene facilities are available to workers, visitors and clients. Logistics 
such  as clean running  water, paper  towels, detergents,  washing  basins,  sanitizers  and  other 
disinfectants, face/nose masks as well as waste disposal containers should be provided for workers, 
visitors and clients by management to prevent the spread of any such virus or bacteria.   
The  offices  and  other  surfaces  at  the  workplace should be  cleaned at appropriate time intervals  to 
ensure that the virus or bacteria are removed and the spread curtailed. 
Good hygiene in the workplace is the responsibility of all. Workers who detect a breach of any good 
hygiene protocol should inform management quickly for the necessary action to be taken. 
 
9.4. Office Ventilation and Use of Air-conditioners 
Management should ensure that workplaces are well-ventilated at all times. For medium or high-risk 
jobs  or  work  tasks,  it  is  recommended  for  management  to  ensure  increased  levels  of  ventilation 
according to WHO standards through natural aeration or artificial ventilation, preferably without re-
circulation. In the case of air re-circulation, filters should be cleaned regularly. 
 
9.5. Provision and Use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs)  
Management should ensure that appropriate personal protective equipment is provided for workers 
who  may be exposed  to  public 
health  risk  or  safety  hazard  while 
at  work  except  where  and  to  the 
extent   that   such risk   has   been 
adequately   controlled   by    other 
means which  are  equally  or  more 
effective.   
Management  should  prioritize  the 
distribution    of    such    personal 
protective  equipment to  workers 
Box 5: What are Personal Protective Equipment 
(PPEs)?  
Personal Protective Equipment consists of 
garments,  goggles,  nose  mask,  gloves,  gown  or 
coverall, head cover, rubber boots, helmets, shields, 
among   others   worn   by   workers   in   hazardous 
environments  to  protect  them  from  infections  and 
transmitting infections to others. 

9 
 
and  clients according  to the  level  of  risk  of  exposure  and  transmission potential. In  other  words, 
workers and  clients who  are  categorized  to  have a high  risk  of  exposure  should  be provided  with 
PPE before those in other categories of risk of exposure and transmission. 
 
9.6. Establishing Organizational Facilities for Quarantine  
In the event of an outbreak at the workplace, the suspected case should be quarantined in a holding 
room immediately in  pre-determined 
locations before  the  arrival  of  the 
appropriate health authorities. 
Management  of  organizations  in  the 
Civil  Service  should  therefore  ensure 
that holding centres  or  facilities  have 
been provided for immediate 
quarantine  of suspected cases.  The 
infected   person(s) who   could   be 
workers,  clients  or  visitors should  be 
handed  over  to professional health 
authorities    and    their    families    or 
dependents appropriately informed to also observe self-isolation. 
 
9.7. Awareness Creation, Communication and Training 
Information  is  very  critical for the  assessment  of  risks,  diagnosis  and  detection  of  cases,  treatment 
and  the  development of organizational  work plans and implementation  of measures.  Management 
should therefore  take requisite steps  to  establish  effective  communication  channels,  develop 
Information  Education  and  Communication (IEC) Materials  and  facilitate  communication  and 
awareness  creation. Management should make  available  all  the  necessary  logistics to  ensure  swift 
sharing  of  information  at  all  times.  Management  should also  put  in  place  mechanisms  to  monitor 
feedback   from   workers,   clients   and   visitors   with   regard   to   the   information   that   has   been 
disseminated concerning a particular outbreak and the measures that have been put in place to curb 
Box 6: What is the difference between holding 
room, isolation and quarantine? 
Holding room refers to a designated area or room 
where suspected infected individuals are kept till 
confirmatory test is done  
• Quarantine refers to the restriction of movement 
or  separation  of  healthy  individuals  who  may  have 
been  exposed  to  the  virus,  from  the  rest  of  the 
population,    with    the    objective    of    monitoring 
symptoms and early detection of cases 
• Isolation  refers  to  the separation  of  infected 
patients from healthy individuals. 

10 
 
its spread and impact on the organization. Management should ensure that the necessary training has 
been conducted for all categories of workers. 
Management  is  obliged  to present information in  languages that  are  easily  understood  by all 
categories   of   workers,   particularly persons   with   disability.   Management   should   ensure   that 
information  is  provided in  formats  (including  braille) that  meet  the  needs  of  all  categories  of 
workers, clients and visitors. 
Training, orientations and information dissemination programmes or events should be conducted in 
a manner that adheres to any mitigation protocols that may be imposed such as social distancing, use 
of PPEs, good office hygiene, among others. 
 
9.8. Social Protection and Livelihood Support Schemes 
In   line   with   lessons   learnt from COVID-19,   Government,   through   the   Service   and   other 
stakeholders, should  institute  comprehensive  social  protection  schemes  and  livelihood  support 
programmes to support victims first, organizations should develop and implement social protection 
schemes for staff who are affected by an outbreak of any public health threat at the workplace. Civil 
Service  Organizations should  liaise  with  the  appropriate  Departments  for  effective  implementation 
of social protection schemes. In addition, management should forge partnerships with existing state 
social protection and livelihood support schemes for the benefit of workers and their families.  
The  aim  of  the  social  protection  and  livelihood  support  schemes  is  to  minimize  or  eliminate  the 
direct impact of any such epidemic/pandemic on the living standards of workers and their families.  
10.0. Key Assumptions 
The effective implementation of this Strategy is based on the following key assumptions: 
1. Organizations will  mainstream  recommendations  and  interventions  in  their  annual  budget 
allocations. 
2. Budget allocations will be released on time.  
3. Management, Workers,  Clients,  Visitors  and all  other  stakeholders  will  play  their  respective 
roles. 

11 
 
4. Relevant  Central  Management  Agencies  (CMA) will  effectively  play  its supportive  and 
coordination roles. 
5. Information sharing will be a priority to all stakeholders. 
11.0. Financing the Strategy 
Organizations in the Civil Service should mainstream the implementation of this Strategy into their 
annual  work plans.  The  specific  activities  that  should  be  implemented  at  the  organizational  level 
should therefore be funded by annual budget releases from the Ministry of Finance. 
In  addition,  organizations may  leverage  their  relationship  with Development  Partners and the 
Private  Sector  to  mobilize  adequate  funds  for  the  implementation  of  their  Workplace  Safety and 
Health Response Work plans. 
The  Office  of  the  Head  of the Civil  Service  may  also  leverage  its  position  to  attract  funding  from 
diverse  sources  to  address  specific  strategic  implementation  challenges that  its  organisations  may 
face. 

12 
 
12.0. Implementation  Plan:  Ghana  Civil  Service  Workplace  Safety and  Health Response 
Strategy 
Policy Objective 1: To protect workers of the Ghana Civil Service, their families and clients 
from any public health threat that may arise. 
Table 2 
No. Key Activity Expected 
Output 
MOV Timeframe Responsibility 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
1. Develop organization-
specific  safety  and  health 
profiles for all the entities 
in     the     Ghana Civil 
Service. 
Organizati
on-specific 
Safety  and 
Health 
Profiles 
developed 
Safety  and 
Health 
Profiles. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: OHCS, 
DFI, GHS, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
2. Consolidate 
organization-specific 
safety  and  health  profiles 
into   a   Composite   Civil 
Service Safety and Health 
Profile. 
Composite 
Civil 
Service 
Safety  and 
Health 
Profile 
developed 
Civil 
Service 
Safety  and 
Health 
Profile 
    Lead: OHCS 
Collaborating: MDs, 
DFI,  
GHS,    The    Presidency, 
DPs. 
3. Develop Information, 
Education & 
Communication (IEC) 
Material   based   on   the 
safety and health profiles. 
IEC 
Materials 
developed. 
Samples 
IECs 
Materials 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: OHCS, 
DFI, GHS, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
4. Disseminate 
organization-specific  and 
Civil  Service-Wide  Safety 
and   Health   Profiles   to 
key stakeholders, 
Safety  and 
Health 
Profiles 
disseminat
ed. 
HR 
Reports 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: OHCS, 
DFI, GHS, The 
Presidency, DPs. 

13 
 
No. Key Activity Expected 
Output 
MOV Timeframe Responsibility 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
particularly those at risk. 
5.  Develop standardized 
preventive     safety     and 
health  protocols  to  guide 
all   organizations   in   the 
Ghana Civil Service.  
Standardiz
ed 
Preventive 
Safety  and 
Health 
Protocols 
(PSHP) 
developed 
Standardiz
ed      Civil 
Service 
PSHP 
Protocols 
    Lead: MOH/GHS 
Collaborating: OHCS, 
MDs, DFI, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
6. Train  Civil  Service  Staff  
to adhere to the 
standardized    preventive 
safety and health 
protocols 
Staff 
trained   on 
Preventive 
Safety  and 
Health 
Protocols 
(PSHP) 
Reports     Lead: MOH/GHS 
Collaborating: OHCS, 
MDs   
7. Conduct periodic 
inspection of the 
standardized    preventive 
safety and health 
protocols    in    all    Civil 
Service organizations. 
Periodic 
inspection
s 
conducted. 
Inspectio
n Reports. 
    Lead: DFI, GHS, 
Collaborating: OHCS, 
MDs,    The    Presidency, 
DPs and MOH/GHS 
 

14 
 
Policy  Objective  2:  To  contain  the  spread  of  any  public  health  threat  such  as  COVID-19 
within the machinery of the Ghana Civil Service. 
No Key Activity Expected Output MOV Timeframe Responsibility 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
1.  Establish workplace 
safety and health(WSH) 
team/committee/ 
taskforce 
WSH Teams/ 
Committee/ 
Taskforce 
established. 
WSH 
Activity 
Reports. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS, 
The Presidency, DPs. 
2.  Conduct specific risk 
assessments in the 
event of an outbreak in 
an organization or the 
entire Civil Service. 
Risk Assessments 
conducted. 
Risk 
Assessme
nt 
Reports. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS, 
The Presidency, DPs. 
3.  Develop IEC materials 
based on the results of 
the risk assessment. 
 
IEC Materials on 
risk assessment 
developed  
IEC 
Materials 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS, 
The Presidency, DPs. 
4.  Develop safety and 
health protocols, 
measures and 
restriction concerning 
that particular 
outbreak.  
Safety and health 
protocols and 
restrictions 
developed. 
WSH 
Team/ 
Committe
e/ 
Taskforce 
Reports  
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DOC, GHS, 
The Presidency, DPs. 
5.  Disseminate IEC 
Materials to all 
stakeholders, 
particularly those at 
risk. 
IEC Materials 
disseminated. 
Reports     Lead: DFI, 
MOH/GHS 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, MDs, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
6.  Impose safety and 
health protocols, 
measures and 
Safety and health 
protocols, measures 
and restrictions 
WSH 
Reports 
    Lead: The Presidency 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, 

15 
 
No Key Activity Expected Output MOV Timeframe Responsibility 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
restrictions. imposed. MOH/GHS, MDs, 
DPs. 
7.  Develop 
comprehensive 
organization-specific or 
Civil Service-Wide 
Workplace Safety and 
Health Response Work 
plans. 
WSHR Work plans 
developed. 
WSHR 
Work 
plans 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS, 
The Presidency, DPs. 
8.  Implement Workplace 
Safety and Health 
Response Work plans 
WSHR Work plan 
implemented. 
MDA 
Reports. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS, 
DPs. 
 
 
9. Procure and distribute 
logistics and personal 
protective equipment 
to all persons at risk. 
PPEs and other 
logistics distributed. 
MDA 
Reports 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS, 
The Presidency, DPs. 
 
 
9.  Provide facilities and 
quarantine centres to 
hold suspected cases. 
Quarantine facilities 
provided. 
MDA 
Reports 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS, 
DPs. 
10.  Train staff on the 
effective use of 
personal protective 
equipment, logistics 
Staff trained on the 
use of PPEs and 
other logistics. 
 Reports.     Lead:  MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI and 
GHS. 

16 
 
No Key Activity Expected Output MOV Timeframe Responsibility 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
and facilities. 
11.  Educate clients and 
visitors on the effective 
use of personal 
protective equipment, 
logistics and facilities.  
Clients and visitors 
educated on the use 
of PPEs and other 
logistics. 
 Reports.     Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS 
12.  Install logistics and 
equipment at vantage 
points for the use of 
staff, clients and 
visitors. 
Logistics and 
Equipment 
installed. 
 Reports     Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS,  
13.  Coordinate the 
implementation of all 
Workplace Safety and 
Health Responses. 
Implementation of 
WSHR work plan 
coordinated across 
the service. 
OHCS 
Reports. 
    Lead: OHCS, DFI, 
GHS, LD 
Collaborating: MDs 
The Presidency 
14.  Review Workplace 
Safety and Health 
Responses. 
WSHR work plans 
reviewed. 
MD 
Reports 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, GHS, 
The Presidency, DPs. 
15.  Regular fumigation and 
disinfection 
Request to 
institutions  
MD 
Reports 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, DFI, and 
GHS. 
 

17 
 
Policy  Objective  3:  To prevent disruptions in  service  delivery,  maintain  productivity  and 
client satisfaction. 
N
o 
Key Activity Expected 
Output 
MOV Timeframe Timeframe 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
1. Enforce  the  use  of  existing 
digitized     work     platforms 
such  as  the  Government  of 
Ghana     Smart     Workplace 
Portal 
The use of 
existing  digitized 
work    platforms 
enforced. 
Reports     Lead: OHCS  
Collaborating: 
MOC/NITA, 
MDs, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
2. Evaluate  work  processes  or 
procedures  in  Civil  Service 
organizations   to   determine 
those that can be digitized. 
Civil Service 
work    processes 
evaluated for 
digitization.  
Evaluati
on 
Report 
    Lead: 
MOC/NITA 
Collaborating: 
OHCS,  MDs,    The 
Presidency, DPs. 
3. Develop a Consolidated 
Civil Service Work Processes 
Digitization Plan in line with 
the development of the MDs 
operational manuals. 
Civil Service 
Work   Processes 
Digitization 
(CSWPD) Plan. 
Consolid
ated 
CSWPD 
Plan 
    Lead: OHCS  
Collaborating: 
MDs, 
MOC/NITA,   The 
Presidency, DPs. 
4. Coordinate    implementation 
of   the   Consolidated   Civil 
Service Work Processes 
Digitization Plan. 
Implementation 
of   Consolidated 
Digitization 
Plans 
coordinated. 
Coordin
ation 
Reports 
    Lead: OHCS  
Collaborating: 
MDs,  MOC/NITA 
The Presidency, 
DPs. 
5. Procure     and     install     IT 
solutions  for  the  digitization 
of work processes or 
procedures. 
IT Solutions 
installed  
 Reports     Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, 
MOC/NITA,   The 
Presidency, DPs. 
6. Train  staff  on  the  use  of  IT 
solutions     about     digitized 
Staff   trained   to 
use IT Solutions 
Training 
Reports 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 

18 
 
N
o 
Key Activity Expected 
Output 
MOV Timeframe Timeframe 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
work processes or 
procedures. 
OHCS, 
MOC/NITA,   The 
Presidency, DPs. 
7. Provide   stable   and   reliable 
internet connectivity to 
support  the  operation  of  all 
IT solutions. 
Stable and 
reliable   internet 
connectivity 
provided. 
 Reports     Lead: MDs, 
MOC/NITA 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, The 
Presidency, and 
DPs. 
 
8. Evaluate  the  effectiveness  of 
digitized work platforms and 
effect corrections. 
Digitized   Work 
Platforms 
evaluated. 
Evaluati
on 
Report 
    Lead: MDs, 
MOC/NITA, 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
9. Develop  responsive flexible 
work arrangements for staff. 
Flexible Work 
Arrangements 
developed. 
 Reports     Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, 
MOC/NITA, DPs. 
10. Organise    orientations    and 
training  for  staff  on  flexible 
work arrangements.  
Workers 
trained/ 
oriented on 
flexible work 
arrangements. 
 Reports     Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, 
MOC/NITA DPs. 
9. Develop information sharing 
materials on. 
IEC Materials 
on Flexible  
 Reports.     Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
 
 flexible   work   arrangements 
and   disseminate   to   clients 
Work 
Arrangements 
     OHCS, 
MOC/NITA DPs 

19 
 
N
o 
Key Activity Expected 
Output 
MOV Timeframe Timeframe 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
and visitors disseminated. 
10. Institute effective 
supervision and 
communication  channels  for 
flexible work arrangements. 
Effective 
communication 
and   supervision 
channels 
established. 
MD 
Reports. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, 
MOC/NITA, DPs. 
11. Provide transportation 
services for staff to minimize 
exposure to the infection.  
Transportation 
Services 
Provided. 
MD 
Reports. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
12. Evaluate  the  effectiveness  of 
the flexible work 
arrangements for each of the 
categories of workers. 
Flexible Work 
Arrangements 
evaluated. 
MD 
Reports. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, 
MOC/NITA, DPs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Policy  Objective  4:  To  provide  rehabilitation,  social  protection  and  livelihood  support  to 
victims and their families or dependents.      
No Key Activity Expected 
Output 
MOV Timeframe Responsibility 
Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
1. Facilitate the 
hospitalization of 
persons  who  fall  victim 
at the workplace. 
Victims 
hospitalized. 
Hospital 
Records. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, GHS. 
2. Pay cost of 
hospitalization for 
workers who fall victim 
at the workplace 
Cost of 
hospitalization  
paid 
Receipts 
of Bills 
paid./ 
Account 
records. 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, GHS, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
3. Develop and implement 
comprehensive 
rehabilitation plans for 
victims at the workplace. 
Comprehensive 
Rehab Plans 
developed and 
implemented. 
Compre
hensive 
Rehab 
Plans/ 
Reports 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS, GHS, The 
Presidency, DPs. 
4. Develop income support 
packages    as    part    of 
existing institutional 
welfare systems. 
Income  support 
packages 
accessible to 
workers and 
their families. 
Reports/ 
Account 
Records. 
    Lead: The 
Presidency 
Collaborating: 
OHCS,  MoGCSP,  
DPs. 
5. Link  workers  and  their 
families  to  existing  state 
social protection 
programmes,     including 
livelihood support 
schemes. 
State social 
protection 
schemes and 
livelihood 
support 
programs 
accessed. 
Reports/ 
List of 
beneficia
ries 
    Lead: MDs 
Collaborating: 
OHCS,   MoGCSP  
The Presidency, 
DPs. 

21 
 
13.0. Monitoring and Evaluation 
Organizations in  the  Civil  Service should develop  their  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Frameworks  to 
track  progress  towards  the  achievement  of  the  objectives  outlined  in  this Strategy.  The  various 
organizational-level   Monitoring   and   Evaluation   Frameworks should   be   consolidated   into   a 
Composite Civil Service M&E Framework to be used by the Office of the Head of the Civil Service 
in its coordination responsibilities for the implementation of this Strategy. 
The  organizational-level  and  Composite Civil  Service  M&E  Frameworks  should  focus  on  tracking 
the following core indicators in addition to other operational level ones: 
1. Number of reported cases 
2. The number of workplace transmissions. 
3. The number of organizations with quarantine facilities or holding rooms. 
4. The number of deaths. 
5. The number of active cases. 
6. The number of persons vaccinated by category of workers. 
7. Percentage change in productivity levels. 
8. The number of organizations with a full complement of logistics. 
9. The   number   of   organizations   with installed   IT   solutions   to   support   flexible   work 
arrangements. 
10. The  number  of  workers  provided  with  PPEs  disaggregated  by  organizations,  gender, and 
level of exposure to the risk. 
11. Availability of appropriate waste disposal containers: 
a) Number of waste bins that are foot-operated and in good order   
b) Number of waste bins lined with appropriate colour-coded liner/bag 
12. Number of toilet facilities with a regular source of water 
Data on these indicators should be collected at prescribed intervals and reported to management for 
further  analysis  and  necessary  action.  Management should make  adequate  provisions  for  the  team, 
committee, task  force  or  other  specialized  professionals  to  collect,  collate  and  prepare  reports  on 
these indicators.  

22 
 
The M&E results should be the primary source of information for the review of existing measures, 
interventions  and  protocols.  The  indicators  should  be  reviewed  periodically based  on  their 
usefulness to the information sharing and communication strategy. 
14.0. Review of the strategy document 
From time to time, in consultation with the OHCS, this strategy document will be reviewed and 
revised as required. This should take place at least once in four years. 
15.0. Conclusion  
The WSHRS serves as a proactive framework to provide guidelines to Ministries and Departments 
for  the  management  of  safety  and  health  responses  to  emerging  threats  at  the  workplace. The 
Strategy therefore commits the Civil Service to continually improve the health and safety of its staff 
and  any  other  person  affected  by  its  activities. The  OHCS  will  continue  to  work  closely  with  the 
various  Ministries  and  Departments  to  ensure  effective  monitoring  of  the  implementation  of  the 
Workplace Safety and Health Response Strategy.   
 
 
 

23 
 
ANNEX 1: ROLES AND RESPONSIBLITIES OF STAKEHOLDERS  
No. Stakeholders Roles and Responsibilities Remarks 
1.  The Presidency i. Provide     national     policy     direction     to 
emergency  health  response  for  all  Public 
Service Organizations. 
ii. Provide    specialized    support    by    making 
services  of  specialized  agencies  available  to 
Civil   Service   organizations   exposed   to   a 
health threat. 
iii. Support    Civil    Service    organizations    to 
eliminate obstacles for effective 
implementation  of  workplace  health  work 
plans/ measures/ protocols. 
iv. Support resource mobilization and 
disbursement. 
 
2.  Ministry of Health/Ghana 
Health Service 
v. Provide  specialized  services  and  technical 
support  to  mitigate  the  spread  of  any  public 
health threat.  
vi. Assist  in  the  establishment  and  operation  of 
holding rooms and quarantine facilities. 
vii. Train Civil Service Staff on workplace health 
and safety protocols. 
 
3.  The Civil Service Council i. Review  and  approve  the  Strategy  document 
for implementation 
ii. Receive   implementation   and   monitoring 
reports    and    recommend    options    for 
improvement.  
iii. Liaise with relevant stakeholders to facilitate 
the effective  implementation  of  the  Strategy 
document  
 

24 
 
4.  Management    of    Civil    Service 
Organizations 
This refers to Officers 
responsible  for  taking  decisions 
of  strategic  importance  for  the 
various Ministries/ Departments.  
  
i. Hire     or     procure     a     public     health/ 
occupational safety/ risk assessment 
professional   to   conduct   an   organization-
specific  risk  assessment/  profile. Support 
the  development  of  workplace  safety  and 
health response work plans. 
ii. Establish    workplace    safety    and    health 
response team/ committee/ task force. 
iii. Provide   logistical   support   to   workplace 
health   and   safety   teams/   committees   to 
function. 
iv. Review  and  approve  workplace  safety  and 
health response work plan. 
v. Facilitate    the    procurement    of    personal 
protective equipment. 
vi. Fund   the   implementation   of   workplace 
health response work plans. 
vii. Establish    workplace    safety    and    health 
response communication channels. 
viii. Commission  monitoring  and  evaluation  of 
workplace    safety    and    health    response 
programmes/ activities/ events. 
ix. Forge  partnerships  with  other  organizations 
or  authorities  within  and  outside  the  Civil 
Service to support implementation, 
monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  workplace 
safety   and   health   response   work   plans/ 
measures/ protocols. 
x. Provide space for the installation of facilities 
within    the    organization for    immediate 
quarantine. 
The 
Department of 
Factories 
Inspectorate 
and the 
Occupational 
Health and 
Environment 
Unit    of    the 
GHS   may   be 
consulted    for 
professional 
assistance. 

25 
 
xi. Take  immediate  action  in  consultation  with 
the  Head  of  Civil  Service  and  the  Public 
Services  Commission  to  forestall  the  spread 
of a health threat. 
xii. Provide   regular   feedback   or   situational 
report  to   the  Head  of  Civil  Service  for 
further directives. 
xiii. Facilitate regular health screening for staff. 
xiv. Supervise regular or periodic 
fumigation/disinfection of offices and office 
environment 
xv. Where feasible, provide or make 
arrangement  for  special  transportation  for 
staff. 
xvi. Facilitate  the  provision  of  social  protection 
services  for  affected  staff  and  their  families 
or dependents. 
5.  The    staff    of    Ministries    and 
Departments 
i. Comply  with  the  request  to  see  designated 
health  practitioners  recommended  by  the 
organization. 
ii. Comply  with  all  directives  by  management 
for curtailment of the spread of the threat or 
risk. 
iii. Nominate  representatives  to  be  part  of  the 
workplace health response team/ 
committee/ task force. 
iv. Report  any  staff  or  visitor  who  refuses  to 
comply    with    the    preventive    measures/ 
protocols. 
v. Adhere  to  changes  in  work  processes  or 
arrangements   without   any   reduction   in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
normal productivity levels. 
vi. Deliver work   outputs   in   a   timely   and 
efficient manner. 
 
 
6.  CLOGSAG/CLOGLAC(Civil 
and Local Service Staff of Ghana 
Ladies Club) 
i. Protect   the   identity   of   informants   who 
provide information on emergent threats.  
ii. Undertake periodic sensitization and 
awareness creation  
iii. Establish  a  standing  “health  and  safety 
committee” to advocate for compliance with 
health and safety protocols 
 
7.  Clients/ Visitors i. Comply  with  measures  or  protocols  put  in 
place  at  the  workplace  to  curtail  the  spread 
of a health threat. 
ii. Follow instructions by designated emergency 
health response staff at all times. 
iii. Report any violation of protocols by staff or 
visitor to the immediate senior officer. 
iv. Pay attention to safety orientations. 
v. Respect flexible work arrangements and visit 
plans accordingly. 
 
8.  Development Partners/ 
CSO/FBO/NGO’s 
i. Support the development and 
implementation   of   workplace   safety   and 
health response work plans. 
ii. Support  collaborative  workplace  health  and 
safety research efforts.  
iii. Provide support in terms of PPE’s 
iv. Support office digitization initiatives 
 
 

27 
 
ANNEX 2: STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS  
No. Stakeholders Concerns/Risk Mitigation Actions 
1.  The 
Presidency 
i. Disruptions in  the  delivery  of 
political promises. 
ii. Fall in national revenue. 
iii. Exposure    of    the    general 
public to threat. 
i. Provide   policy   direction   to   the   fight 
against the spread. 
ii. Provide  support for  the implementation 
of     Workplace     Safety     and     Health 
Response. 
iii. Ensure   timely   release   of   funds   to 
implement work digitization plans. 
iv. Impose  general measures  in  line  with 
global and MoH protocols. 
2.  Civil Service 
Council 
i. Inability   to   deliver   on   set 
targets  
ii. Unproductive Civil Service   
i. Provide     policy     direction     for the 
implementation of WSHR work plans 
ii. Provide support for  the implementation 
of WSHR work plans. 
3.  Office   of   the 
Head  of  Civil 
Service 
i. Loss of productivity. 
iii. Disruptions in service 
delivery. 
i. Coordinate implementation of 
Workplace  Safety  and  Health  Response 
(WSHR)  
ii. Support   digitization   of  work   in   Civil 
Service Organisations. 
4.  Management iv. Non-use of Personal 
Protective Equipment by 
workers, clients and visitors. 
v. Poor   supervision   of   flexible 
work arrangements. 
vi. Fall   in   demand   for   some 
services  
i. Impose disciplinary actions. 
ii. Effective supervision by supervisors. 
iii. Investment in  ICT  solutions  to  support 
flexible work arrangements. 
5.  CLOGSAG i. The   unwillingness   of   some 
Civil  Service  organizations  to 
adhere   to   health   and   safety 
protocols/guidelines 
i. The  continuous  advocacy  for  adherence 
to protocols 
ii. The pursuit of legal action (if possible) 

28 
 
No. Stakeholders Concerns/Risk Mitigation Actions 
6.  Clients and 
Visitors 
i. Non-access to services. 
ii. Unsafe office environments. 
 
i. Ensure effective information sharing. 
ii. Provide     preventive     guidelines     and 
precautions. 
iii. Provide logistics at vantage points. 
7.  CSO’s 
/FBO’s/NG
O’s 
i. Breaks  in  the  implementation 
of  MOUs  with  Ministries  and 
Departments 
 
i. Support the provision of PPEs. 
ii. Support    implementation    of    WSHR 
plans. 
iii. Support office digitization plans. 
8.  Development 
Partners 
i. Breaks  in  the  implementation 
of cooperation agreements 
i. Support the provision of PPEs. 
ii. Support   implementation   of   WSHR 
plans. 
iii. Support office digitization plans.