Vo l u m e   17, 2022 
Accepting Editor Nicole Buzzetto-Hollywood │Received: May 9, 2022│ Revised: September 14, 2022 │ Ac-
cepted: September 20, 2022.  
Cite as: Ali, A., Pandya, S., & Varma, U. (2022). Writing doctoral dissertation literature review: Identifying the 
prerequisites, corequisites, and the iterative process for writing the literature. International Journal of  Doctoral Stud-
ies, 17, 433-458. https://doi.org/10.28945/5026  
(CC BY-NC 4.0) This article is licensed to you under a Creati   ve Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International 
License. When you copy and redistribute this paper in full or in part, you need to provide proper attribution to it to ensure 
that others can later locate this work (and to ensure that others do not accuse you of plagiarism). You may (and we encour-
age you to) adapt, remix, transform, and build upon the material for any non-commercial purposes. This license does not 
permit you to use this material for commercial purposes.
 
WRITING DOCTORAL DISSERTATION LITERATURE 
REVIEW: IDENTIFYING THE PREREQUISITES, 
COREQUISITES, AND THE ITERATIVE PROCESS FOR 
WRITING THE LITERATURE 
Azad Ali* Indiana University of Pennsylvania, 
Indiana, PA, USA 
Azad.ali@iup.edu  
Shardul Pandya American National University,  
Salem, VA, USA 
drspandya@yahoo.com    
Umesh Varma American National University,  
Salem, VA, USA 
ucvarma@an.edu 
*Corresponding author 
ABSTRACT 
Aim/Purpose Identify the prerequisites, the corequisites, and the iteration processes in or-
ganizing and writing the literature review chapter of doctoral dissertations 
Background Writing the literature review chapter of doctoral dissertations presents unique 
challenges. Students waste a lot of time identifying material to write, and the 
experience is generally that of frustration and time delay.  
Methodology This paper reviews literature to identify levels of information helpful for 
writing the literature review chapter: prerequisites, corequisites, and iteration 
process.   
Contribution The contribution of this paper is different than others that have been written 
about the literature review. The intended audiences for this paper are men-
tors, advisors, or academies that supervise students in writing their doctoral 
dissertations. Th is paper introduces the writing of the literature review by or-
ganizing the suggestions into groups of   topics more familiar to academies 
than in other fields. The concepts of prerequisites, corequisites, and iteration 
are very familiar to educators; they    often use them in their courses. The aca-
demic curriculums are built on such concepts. Thus, grouping the discussion 
into these terms familiar to mentors, advisors, or doctoral dissertations super-
visors will put the findings into a more helpful focus for educators that su-
pervise students in writing the literature review chapter.    

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
434 
Findings Writing a doctoral dissertation literature review is long and complicated be-
cause some students delve    into the writing without much preparation. Identi-
fying what is helpful before and   during the writing and being mindful of the 
repetitive steps helps    guide the students through the writing of the literature 
review chapter of doctoral dissertations.  
Recommendations  
for Practitioners 
Before delving into the writing of the literature review, it will be helpful to 
identify the prerequisites, the corequisites, and the iteration process that goes 
into the writing literature review.  
Recommendations  
for Researchers  
Writing the literature review chapter in doctoral dissertations remains chal-
lenging. More research would be helpful that focuses on the late writing 
stages. The suggestions we made in this paper could form a solid start for fu-
ture research in this topic.       
Impact on Society The research findings will help doctoral mentors/advisors guide students in 
completing the chapter on literature review 
Keywords literature review, dissertation literature review, phases of literature review, 
snowballing in literature review 
INTRODUCTION 
In my view, an incredible amount of scholarly waste exists in the academic industry 
that results from the inefficient way doctoral students typically conduct doctoral liter-
ature reviews. Thousands of doctoral students every year spend hundreds of hours 
on their dissertation literature review. Most of this time is spent aimlessly floundering 
since most students don’t know what they are doing, and most supervisors don’t have 
a model for guiding them to proceed in a systematic manner. (Okoli, 2015, p  . 904) 
The points that can be drawn from the quote above are twofold. First, a literature review is essential 
to completing a doctoral dissertation before working on the other chapters. Second, it can be inferred 
that   conducting a literature review could turn out to be an unnecessarily lengthy and daunting pro-
cess.    The main reason that    makes the writing of the literature review chapter long is that students of-
ten venture into writing the chapter without much preparation and adequate knowledge of what is 
involved in writing the chapter (Randolph, 2009).   
Writing a literature review (typically the second chapter of a doctoral dissertation), if started without 
adequate knowledge about what goes into  writing the dissertation, will complicate the effort and   ex-
pand    the time required to write it (Ebrahim, 2012). Many issues need to be addressed before and dur-
ing the literature review, and identifying these issues could lead to a better understanding of writing 
the literature review chapter. This paper addresses these    issues    surrounding the writing of chapter 
two of   doctoral dissertations. The purpose of this study is to identify factors that    are  helpful at the 
different phases of the writing of a literature review: 
- The   factors that   are helpful to learn before starting the writing of chapter 2. We term this 
knowledge as the prerequisites to writing chapter 2 and cover it first. 
- The   specific attributes that are needed to develop during the writing of chapter 2. We term 
this as the corequisites to writing the chapter on lit review, and we cover it second. 
- The repetitive nature of specific steps that students follow when writing the literature review. 
We   name these steps the iterative process for reading and organizing the reviewed literature. 
- The daunting task of formalizing the long list of literature reviewed into clear writing con-
sistent with the purpose of research and adhering to formatting and regulation guidelines is 
addressed next in this paper. 

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
435 
- Last, the paper displays a symbolic su mmary of what is discussed in the paper and the sug-
gestions it made. It will also include recommendations for future research on topics related 
to writing doctoral dissertations.  
RESEARCH PLAN 
The purpose of this research is to clarify the   factors of prerequisites, corequisites, and the iterative 
process that are helpful to the writing of the   literature review chapter of doctoral dissertations. The 
clarification comes in two different forms: First, through the explanation of the various arti  cles to 
form a view of what is involved in writing each phase of the literature review. Second, through draw-
ing figures that represent what was discussed during the phase of the literature review. Then, the fig-
ures   are merged into one combined chart representative of all the stages of writing the literature re-
view chapter. So instead of following a straight line of completion in this study, an often-wavy line is 
followed to clarify the different points that   need to be explained here in this paper. Figure 1 depicts 
the wavy way this research has   followed to report their findings. 
 
 
Figure 1: Plan Overview of  This Paper 
IDENTIFYING PREREQUISITES FOR THE LITERATURE REVIEW 
Prerequisite is a word often repeated in academia to refer to one or more courses a student must 
complete before they are eligible to tak  e a specific course. For example, a  course IT8000 Research 
Method I might be a prerequisite for the course IT8100 Research Method II. This means a student 
cannot register for IT8100 unless they have    taken and passed IT8000 or are otherwise able to 
demonstrate evidence of knowledge of material covered in IT8000. Thus, knowledge of material im-
parted in IT8000 is a prerequisite for students enrolling in IT8100. Furthermore, it stands to reason 
that if a student begins work in IT8100 without the prerequisite knowledge for IT8100, the student 
will, at best, flounder and struggle in IT8100. 
Identifying
Prerequesites
IdentifyinCo-
requisites
Explainingthe 
itermation 
process
Suggestions for 
writingchapter 
two

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
436 
In this paper, we use the word Prerequisite to mean knowledge that will be helpful to students as they 
begin and eventually complete chapter two -  the literature review chapter. In other words, it will be 
more beneficial to the students in their literature review writing if they have this knowledge. We have 
identified the following points that   are helpful to teach the students before starting the work on the 
literature review: 
• Identifying the dissertation research topic 
• Review of published dissertations 
• Clarify the purpose of   the   literature review 
• Identify typical contents of     the   literature review 
• Establish evaluation metrics and benchmarks 
CLEAR IDENTIFICATION OF THE RESEARCH TOPIC 
Writing a literature review can be helped by adequately identifying the research topic. Clarifying the 
research topic helps identify what sources to review, keywords to search for, databases to search for, 
and in many other ways. To put it differently, clear identification of the research topic can give more 
precise directions in the writing of a literature review (Paul & Criado, 2020; Torraco, 2016; Webster & 
Watson, 2002).   
Identifying the research topic does not come in isolation. Instead, it must be connected to other dis-
sertation sections before being clarified. Lunenburg and Irby (2008) suggested that explaining the re-
search purpose as a pre-condition to starting the literature review is essential. Ali and Pandya (2021) 
stressed the importance of clarifying the research question section before beginning the literature re-
view. 
Along with suggestions for the   research problem statement, other concepts in the dissertations need 
to be clarified. Writing the literature review can be helped by specifying the expected outcome of the 
research (Terrell, 2015). Understanding the section of research purpose can help determine if the 
topic is research worthy (Levy     & Ellis, 2006) and what kind of literature search needs to be com-
pleted. Along the same lines, crucial to clarifying the   research topic is knowledge of how to collect 
data for the research, which brings the issue of the   targeted population for the study (Jalali & Wohlin, 
2012).  
REVIEW OF PUBLISHED DISSERTATIONS 
Reviewing published dissertations before writing the literature review is of enormous value to the 
student writing the   dissertation. This is more specifically true about writing the literature review. 
Studying published dissertations provides students with examples and can serve as a guide or naviga-
tion tool as they begin their dissertation journey (Wohlin, 2014). Some challenges could be faced in 
the search for published dissertations. However, electronic library databases can help (Bates    et al., 
2017).  
In our search, we found at least one library database that is specifically geared toward finding pub-
lished dissertations. Using the ProQuest Dissertations and Theses library database, students can search 
through numerous published dissertations. According to  the headlines listed on their page, ProQuest 
has the most comprehensive collection of dissertations, and their published dissertations can go back 
to 1861. Unless searching for   some specific or seminal dissertation, most    students would not need to 
go back beyond the past five years. But that one can search for dissertations going back 150+ years 
could be helpful to some students when they review literature.  
Students can search for dissertations in ProQuest using    a simple search. They can also use the ad-
vanced search feature, which allows the search to narrow down. The advanced search has different 
search options and logical operators that can help narrow down the field and focus more or narrow 
the focus of the searched dissertations so the search could be more manageable. 

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
437 
CLARIFYING PURPOSE OF LITERATURE REVIEW 
The   literature review has different purposes of achieving and different sections to include. Randolph 
(2009), for example, suggested four purposes for completing the literature review:  
• Demonstrating the author’s knowledge of the selected field of study 
• Clarify the vocabulary, theories, key variables, and phenomena for the selected topic of re-
search 
• Presents a  history of the topic and methods of searching for information about the topic 
• Inform the students of the influential researchers for the chosen topic 
Xiao and Watson (2019) noted that the objectives of the literature review could be three: understand 
the   depth of knowledge in a field and find gaps; test   hypotheses and develop new theories; and re-
veal weaknesses, contradictions, and inconsistencies.  
Jacobs (2013) stressed the importance of conducting a literature review to narrow down the writing 
of  the   research problem statement. Wee and Banister (2016) suggested that a literature review repre-
sents an added value for researchers because they (the researchers) get up-to -date information on the 
issue being discussed in the problem statement. Torraco (2005  ), on the other hand, considers con-
ducting a literature review very important because it gives the researcher exposure to past writings on 
the topic and provides a framework on which to explore the future.  
We can detect from the statements above that conducting a literature review is sometimes considered 
an “eye-opener” for the researcher in terms of starting the dissertation by writing the research prob-
lem statement (Columbaro, 2009). Literature review, in turn, gives the students ideas on what prob-
lems were discussed in the past and compares them with the problem identified in their research 
(Okoli, 2015). It gives them examples of how research problem statements were written in the past, 
and they can model what they learned   to write their problem statement (Ebrahim, 2012).  
Last, we refer to Shaf fril et al. (2020), who described the purpose of the   literature review in the fol-
lowing statement: 
Previous works are fundamental to the creation of new knowledge. When performing 
a literature review, researchers analyze, interpret, and critically evaluate the existing 
body of knowledge. The process allows them to discover the patterns of prior results, 
comprehend the depth and details of the existing knowledge, and identify gaps for 
further exploration. ( p. 1) 
COMMON CONTENT TYPICALLY INCLUDED IN LITERATURE REVIEW 
An appropriate question that could be asked at this point includes what to incorporate in the litera-
ture review and which section headings need to be included. Different studies answer this question, 
but the results do not produce a shortlist of topics to be covered in a literature review chapter. For 
example, Lunenburg and Irby (2008) list ten common topics to be included in the   chapter of litera-
ture review: Providing a historical background; Describing its current status; Supporting the purpose 
of  the   study; Identifying gaps in the literature; Becoming aware of variables relevant to the problem; 
Understanding the seminal studies that are cited more often; Identifying the leading scholars relevant 
to the problem; Proposing useful theoretical constructs for the study; Understanding the methodol-
ogy used, and Observing comparative studies. Rowe (2014) suggested that the literature review chap-
ter needs to include a summary of prior research, examination, and contribution of the   present re-
search, an  explanation of results of prior studies, and clarifying alternative views. Kraus et al. (2020), 
on the other hand, offer that   a literature review should contain an  explanation of the definition of 
critical terms and concepts, the theoretical foundation of the study, the    historical context of the topic 
of study, genesis of the topic, and   synthesis of literature review.  

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
438 
As seen here, the suggestions are diverse and numerous. Admittedly, the content of the literature re-
view could vary greatly depending on the topic being selected. However, some minimum identifiable 
sections need to be clarified that could lead the students to start somewhere with the writing of the 
literature review chapter. Based on our review and what was noted in this section, we determined that 
the minimum required sections in the chapter of the   literature review could include the following.  
Introduction: Describe the topic, the purpose of the dissertation, and an overview of the structure 
of the chapter (Denscombe, 2017).  
Search strategy: It is essential to include what the student has done to search the literature and or-
ganize them into helpful topics that can be written at later stages. It will be helpful if the student 
give s details about what databases were searched, what keywords were used, and   the results of find-
ing and filtering (Kable et al., 2012).  
Historical Context of  the Dissertation Topic: Presenting some historical context of a topic could 
be helpful. Clarifying what took place before the current content sets the reader to appreciate the ex-
isting content (Nystrand, 2006). It can also serve as a platform to appreciate new research that doc-
toral students conduct. 
The theoretical foundation used in the study is worthy of research and explanation because the 
doctoral dissertation is typically based on a theoretical foundation (Osanloo & Grant, 2016). The sec-
tion on the theoretical foundation is a major focus of doctoral dissertations because many other sec-
tions build on it. Thus, providing the   detailed context of the theoretical foundation is needed in the 
literature review chapter. 
The variables used in the study:  If there is a model that the study will follow or variables that will 
be studied, the literature review chapter is a good place to introduce this. This    discussion may   sound 
specific to quantitative dissertations, but it is not. Typically, quantitative, qualitative, and mixed 
method studies all  have variables in some shape or form, and it is helpful to introduce and explain 
them within the literature review chapter of a doctoral dissertation (Osanloo & Grant, 2016).  
Literature Review and Synthesis: As the name suggests, this section forms the core of the chapter 
on literature review. The materials covered in this section lay the foundation for building the content 
of chapter 2 of doctoral dissertations. Therefore, this section is pivo  tal in how the dissertation would 
proceed (Kraus et al., 2020). Understandably, the contents of this section are specific to the research 
problem, and the materials discussed in this section would vary from one study to the next. However, 
analysis and synthesis of the reviewed material justify the selection of the theoretical framework and 
the variables used in the study (Paré et al., 2015). 
In the literature review section, the researcher is expected to search for answers to the research ques-
tion(s) they have proposed in chapter 1 of their study. They do this by sourcing, reviewing, an alyzing, 
and synthesizing current relevant published literature. This exercise is important because it serves two 
purposes.  
The first purpose of this exercise is that it establishes that the research problem proposed in chapter 
one is a known problem among academics. It is important to establish that the proposed research is 
of interest to researchers and that the student has   not proposed using their doctoral journey to solve 
a local problem or to research a “pet peeve.” If academically rigorous research publications discuss-
ing their problem cannot be found, the student risks not adding to the “body of knowledge” once 
their work is complete (Ferrari, 2015).   
The second purpose of studying current literature on the research topic is to confirm that, while the 
topic has been studied in academia, a solution to the student’s specific research question(s) is un-
known. Obviously, while conducting this exercise, if the student finds a solution to their question(s), 
their research proposal is moot. But by searching for and not finding a solution, the student can es-
tablish that (a) this is a legitimate problem and (b) no known solution can be found (Kraus et al., 
2020). Thus  , the student makes the case that the only way to answer their research question(s) is for 

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
439 
the student to solve the problem themself. This then sets the tone for chapter three, where the stu-
dent discusses the research method and   specifies, in detail, how they plan to use to solve the prob-
lem. Hence, this section lays the foundation that will play a pivotal role in how the dissertation will 
proceed. 
EVALUATION METRICS/BENCHMARKS/CRITERIA 
Setting criteria to evaluate completed work has been part of academia from its inception. The criteria 
can be set at  the   assignment level, at a course level, at  the   program level, or even to obtain a degree. 
De Villiers et al. (2017) suggested that set conditions for evaluation need to start by identifying the 
evaluation subject, then the   criteria, and then the metrics. This entails clarifying what is to be com-
pleted and how it is going to be evaluated. Developing criteria can come in the form of evaluation 
metrics or establishing benchmarks (Sarialtin, 2015). By establishing metrics or setting benchmarks, 
criteria can be established   in terms of answers to the question of what makes a quality submission 
(Schoenfeld et al., 2018). 
Evaluation metrics and criteria are everywhere. And they are practiced repeatedly in different applica-
tions. They can be used to evaluate employee performance when applying for promotion, for in-
stance. They can be used in academia to evaluate the work submitted by students for grading or eval-
uate faculty for tenure or promotion eligibility. Metrics    are often attached to the performance evalua-
tion process. These metrics are benchmarks that determine if the   examined performance meets the 
conditions for which the evaluation is being conducted.  
Similarly, for the chapter on literature review, different qualitative measurements can be applied. 
However, along with qualitative measurements, it will be helpful to include some quantitative metrics 
that students can learn to look for in advance. Two such metrics commonly exist for doctoral disser-
tations  : the number of pages and the number of references that are cited in the chapter. (Kushkow-
ski et al., 2003). 
The number of written pages    may   not always reflect quality. The common notion is that more writ-
ten pages may indicate proficiency in writing while fewer pages may show the opposite. Longer writ-
ing does not necessarily correlate with    the   quality and depth of writing. On the contrary, fewer pages 
may be more concise in describing the reviewed literature (Kraus et al.., 2020). Nevertheless, the 
number of pages in a literature review chapter is commonly used    as a benchmark when reflecting on 
the   quality of the chapter.  
The number and type of references are other indicators of  research depth. I f more references are 
listed in the document, it could imply that more articles are reviewed, and thus more knowledge is 
presented in the chapter. This may not always be true. Writing with fewer references could be more 
direct and have better quality than with a reference list that   boasts a larger number of references ( D.   
A. Becker & Chiware, 2015).  
Another quantitative metric is the originality report, which is a measure of the extent of match be-
tween a paper submitted for evaluation and other publications (Baptista et al., 2015). While no spe-
cific   scoring of matches is available, it is accepted that a high percentage of a   match     may be indica-
tive   of plagiarism. A common issue that results in high matches is direct quotes (Trinchera, 2002). 
Too many direct quotes in a document will result in high matches. So, it will be best if these direct 
quotes are kept to a minimum. 
Determining qualitative metrics for assessing the chapter on literature review could be more challeng-
ing to identify. Brocke et al. (2009) noted that the quality of the   literature review is often affected by 
the literature review process – that is, the portion of the chapter that talks explicitly about the   litera-
ture review. Since this explicit talk of about a literature review could be unique to each dissertation, it 
will be challenging to establish metrics that can be applied to all who write chapter two or this section 
in the chapter.  

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
440 
Based on the discussion in this section, we list in Figure 2 a waterfall graph that shows our suggested 
prerequisites for writing chapter 2. We selected the waterfall shape to show that each step depends 
(falls in) on the previous step. That is, one step falls into the   next step, and so on. We suggest that 
these steps are to be explained consecutively to start with clarifying the topic, and as the topic is clari-
fied, then talking about the purpose of the   literature review is made easier. The same thing    can be 
said   about the other steps.  
 
Figure 2 –  Depiction of prerequisites to conducting a literature review 
IDENTIFYING THE COREQUISITES TO LITERATURE REVIEW  
In academia, the term “co  -requisites” is  often    used to identify courses that are needed to be taken to-
gether. In other words, a course (call it course A) needs to be taken at the same time as another 
course (call it course B) because knowledge in both courses complements each other or is required to 
be taken together. In this study, we refer to the corequisites as characteristics, activities, and steps that 
are helpful to have while conducting the literature review. In particular, we deem the following factors 
as helpful to have during the writing of the literature review chapter of the doctoral dissertation: 
• Managing the reviewed literature 
• Annotations in digital documents 
• The progressive quality of the writing of literature review 
• Self-efficacy and writing efficacy 
MANAGING THE REVIEWED LITERATURE 
Over the past two decades, “Googling” has   morphed into an acceptable verb in the English language, 
and it is common knowledge that one can quickly get oodles of information on almost any subject 
by simply searching for it on internet browsers. However, most of what is found from web searches 
need not be directly related to the topic being searched (Harzing & Van der Wal, 2008). Instead, 
Clearly 
identifying 
research 
topic
Review of 
published 
dissertations
Clarify 
purpose of 
literature 
review
Identify 
common 
content
Identify quality 
measurements

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
441 
search results yield portions of the phrase searched for, similar words, or other tertiary information 
related and oftentimes unrelated to the search. So, internet surfers end up having to decipher through 
the   loads of information displayed to them and   separate the   wheat from the chaff.  
A similar thing can be said about students writing doctoral dissertations: when they search for a 
topic, they can find a lot of information from a simple search they conduct. But they could be over-
whelmed by the volume of information that they   find from the search (Beliga, 2014). In addition, 
this   information volume must be recalled later when writing the d   issertation. To avoid being over-
whelmed and to make it easier for retrieval later , the reviewed literature needs to be organized to sim-
plify the recall. For this purpose, two concepts were discussed among researchers on how to manage 
the   reviewed literature: concept map and organizing references and citations.  
A concept map is a help  ful way to plot ideas. I t draws graphics because the text that describes the 
concept that is cumbersome and difficult to understand (Wilhelm & Kaunelis, 2005). These concepts 
can better be explained if put in a chart or a diagram that depicts the relationship among these ele-
ments. Figure 3 shows the conceptual map for the formal problem determination. Ideally, a re-
searcher may have already considered the concept based on his or her perceptual ability. However, 
the concept must be translated into one or more constructs so that a determination can be made as 
to what variables should be investigated. This is where the preliminary review of the literature will 
indicate the gap in research or the need for replication of such research to substantiate the findings 
of other researchers. Regardless of the objective of literature review – action research, case study, 
cohort design, cross-sectional design, descriptive, experimental, exploratory, or field research – the 
researcher may need to cross-reference the   problem domain with the existing literature to establish a 
strong case for the study of perceived dependent variable(s). Although, at this stage the problem do-
main cannot be defined formally, nevertheless, and as indicated in the concept map, the validation 
and verification of the problem requires further refinement by adding three distinct components that 
include a) preliminary investigation or analysis of the problem, b) internal/external controls that may 
influence dependent variable, and c) researcher’s own skills, efficacy, perceptual ability, and risk-taking 
propensity.  
 
Figure 3 – Concept Map Schema for Problem Determination 

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
442 
Another way    to manage all the references that were found in the search is by using the reference 
management (RM)    software tool. Gilmour and Cobus-Kuo (2011) recommended the use of refer-
ence management software because it contains the following features: 
• Organization: Reference managers offer   different ways of managing references, including 
breaking them into categories that can be recalled and tagging the reviewed literature so it 
can be easily categorized.  
• Searching and sorting: RM software allows searching and sorting the software. This fea-
ture is particularly helpful when attempting to look for specific information later    after    the 
student has commenced writing with intensity.  
• Annotation: RM software allows adding notes to the references. In other words, as the 
search for literature continues and the student decides to include a reference, they can add 
notes to remind them of the main points or the reason for adding this literature. Although it 
may sound trivial, any little step that can organize and simplify the review process is  help  ful. 
• Citing references and creating bibliographies: This   feature help  s immensely reduce er-
rors from misspelling and incorrectly citing references. As the research proposal – and later, 
the thesis – nears completion, it will be critical that   all references are correctly spelled and all 
references listed in the reference section are cited in the body of the dissertation and   vice 
versa. RM software can help with this time-consuming and tedious task. 
While    RM software is  helpful and perhaps superior in managing the references, most Word Pro-
cessing software offers many of the above features. MS Word for example offers a feature to tag the 
references for easy categorization and review. MS Word also   offers options for citations but is limited 
to inserting parenthetical citations (the citation listed at the end of the sentence).  
Organizing the reviewed literature is not limited to the use of the software. Other ways can be intro-
duced to organize the reviewed literature. One way is to create a spreadsheet in which the student 
highlights or lists the main points from the reviewed literature. It can be done by listing the main col-
umns, including author, title, focus, context, and other information. Saving all this information as Ex-
cel a  nd PDF files can help review and find information (via search feature) at later stages. Most elec-
tronic libraries and search engines allow the download of PDF files. These files can be saved and or-
ganized, and   they aid in searching for content as the writing of the literature review begins. 
ANNOTATION IN DIGITAL DOCUMENTS  
Note-taking (or annotation) on printed documents has long been practiced in academia. Annotation 
can be practiced in many forms: Making notes on the margins of the page, underlying text, scribbling 
on the selected text, and other means of annotations. Highlighting text with different colors or even 
adding post-it slips to mark pages where specific information is  located serves the same purpose 
(Pearson et al., 2009). (The annotation techniques allow the researcher to backtrack relevant findings 
and cross-reference with continued research.) This kind of annotation contributes to close attentive 
reading where more concentration and memory of materials read is needed.  
Above was the norm until technological advances led to a practice evolving significantly. Over the 
past two decades, primary reading gradually shifted to interactive on-screen and digital media (Pear-
son et al., 2012). For a while, this reading of digital documents made it difficult to make annotations, 
as  digital media was not conducive to notetaking. This then affected attentive reading (Buchanan et 
al., 2015).  
Today, digital readers have evolved, with embedded annotation tools routinely available within web 
browsers and portable document format (PDF) such as Adobe Acrobat Reader. The simplest and 
most common annotation tools include drawing with different colors, highlighting text with different 
color codes, adding pop-up comments to certain text for clarification, reading aloud, and other anno-
tation tools.  

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
443 
Pearson et al. (2012) research took the annotation issue and further provided significant suggestions 
for using digital screen annotation to make it easier to annotate. Pearson et al. listed the following 
techniques that could be used for annotation in digital documents: 
• Annotation and bookmarking 
• Document mark-up tools are as easy as possible 
• Unified post-it tool 
• Visual placeholders 
• Digital reading desk 
• Digital notetaking 
With these techniques, readers can annotate in different ways, including writing on the margins, 
bookmarking where different sections can be linked to others, color coding, and many other tech-
niques that students can use. The point that can be drawn is that annotation came back to the digital 
screen with more power: readers can highlight, underline, draw, and others as  in the past. In addition 
to  annotation in digital documents, digital    flashcards and further annotation tools can be used to help 
pay close attention while reading and   so to serve    for easier retrieval at a later stage of writing a  litera-
ture review (Pearson et al., 2009). 
Annotation tools can come in handy and be helpful for students writing their literature reviews. 
When going through the literature volume, it is not a good idea to totally depend on one’s memory 
and to remember all the notes taken during the review. Instead, using annotation tools in various 
forms provided with technology could help with the retrieval of the information and the writing of 
the reviews (Agosti & Ferro, 2007). 
WRITING EFFICACY AN D SELF EFFICACY 
Self-ef ficacy has been the subject of discussions in many research areas and is considered a key con-
tributor to the success of individuals who persist and complete tasks (Bandura, 1993, Bruning et al., 
2013). Bandura (2006) explained that self-efficacy is often associated with the capability of the indi-
vidual to complete tasks. On the other hand, Bruning et al. (2013) described self-efficacy as the per-
sonal confidence that one has that one can complete one’s task successfully in the intended domain. 
In other words, students with higher self-efficacy can tolerate more challenges and persist longer. 
Bandura (2006) identified four skills that contribute to an individual’s self-efficacy: cognitive skills, 
motivational skills, emotional skills, and behavioral skills. In terms of the completion of academic 
tasks, Bandura (1993) noted that self-efficacy operates at three different levels when it comes to con-
tributing to students’ academic success. These include the   student’s belief, the teacher’s belief, and the 
faculty’s belief in the students’ self-efficacy. McBrayer et al. (2018) studied the relationship between 
self-efficacy and time to degree completion of doctoral study. The study concluded that students 
with higher self-efficacy end up completing the writing of their dissertations in a shorter time.  
A subsection of the concepts discussed regarding the writing of a doctoral dissertation is the writing 
efficacy of the student. Writing efficacy is connected to self-efficacy and is  described by Stadtlander 
et al. (2020) as how well a researcher can accomplish writing tasks based on various skills, such as 
composition, grammar, and other mechanical skills. Bruning et al. (2013) explained that writing effi-
cacy is a function of three factors: writing ideation, writing convention, and writing self-regulation. In 
writing ideation, the researcher starts with writing ideas as they emerge in mind, though how well the 
researcher expresses the ideas is also important. The writing convention is about the different con-
ventions and rules that need to be followed when writing. Writing self-regulation is related to manag-
ing the writing of tasks and observing the writing habits that researchers develop.  
Self-efficacy and writing-eff icacy are necessary components in successfully writing the doctoral dis-
sertations literature review chapter. Self-efficacy is connected to writing efficacy because self-efficacy 
influences writing efficacy (Stadtlander et al., 2020). In other words, higher self-efficacy students will 

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
444 
make better writing progress. The question that could be asked regarding this study is how advi-
sors/mentors can   influence or contribute to enhancing both efficacies and thereby fostering pro-
gress.   
Stadtlander et al. (2020) noted that a structured experience that the mentor supervises helps improve 
the   students’ self-efficacy. Breitenbach (2019) suggested that designing a structured program with 
sufficient feedback could help more students complete their dissertations. Ewing et al. (2012) echoed 
similar contentions and noted further that designing a structured dissertation writing process helps 
acquire research skills.  
Structured experience in the dissertation writing (and writing chapter two of the dissertation) can be 
helped by using a rubric type of feedback. Sparrow (2004) suggested that using rubrics improves 
teaching by explaining grading criteria. We argue that rubrics also help in writing with efficacy and 
self-efficacy. Rubrics provide a clearer picture of what is expected. Therefore, students can approach 
the task with greater clarity.   
After going through this discussion, we drew a chart (Figure 4) to depict what is needed for corequi-
sites while writing the literature review. We presented the shape in similar rectangles to show that all 
factors are handled at the same level and that they do not depend on previous steps to be completed. 
 
Figure 4 –   Factors helpful during (co  -requisites) to writing a literature review 
THE ITERATIVE STEPS IN LITERATURE REVIEW 
Iteration (or loop) is repeated often in computer programming courses. It refers to a step (or a series 
of steps) that are repeated until a condition is met, and   at that time, the iteration is branched out and 
continues to the next set of instructions. If the condition to halt the iteration cannot be met, the 
condition is called an “endless loop” or an “ infinite iteration”. So, to prevent an endless loop, there 
must   be a set of conditions to end an iteration (Felizardo et al., 2016).  
In writing a literature review, closely similar concepts are practiced when reviewing the   literature. 
Given the plethora of available literature, students can   get caught up in searching for and reading 
more and more and inadvertently, or even perhaps advertently, keep postponing the writing or adding 
new material to their reviewed literature. At some point, writing has to start    for the student to move 
forward. Otherwise, the student may enter into the endless loop that is sometimes seen in computer 
programming. 
Th is section explains the iterative process that characterizes some literature review steps. It includes 
the following sections: Selecting keyword/ key phrase for searching the literature, Identifying the elec-
tronic database for the search, Snowballing, and   Writing small 
KEYWORDS (KEY PHRASES) SELECTION FOR SEARCHING 
The literature review typically starts with identifying a topic and learning about a few keywords that 
best describe the topic. The intent of identifying keywords is to start searching using them to find 
articles related to the topic of the study in the dissertation (Siddiqi & Sharan, 2015). The question 
that   could be asked at this point is how to identify words or phrases for search. 
Good record 
keeping of 
reviewed literature
Good annotation of 
the reviewed 
literature
Writing with 
efficacy and self 
efficacy

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
445 
Lunenburg and Irby (2008) suggested using the funnel approach, where the search begins with gen-
eral terms and then narrows the keywords to more specific ones. At the wider end of the funnel, stu-
dents can find more literature through the search, while later, there will be fewer articles found as the 
student focuses the search more.  
The funnel approach can go only so far as the search continues. At this time, more specific keywords 
need to be used to focus the search, and   alternative words may   need to be used in the search (Linder 
et   al., 2015). The    question that could be asked at that point is what other keywords to use as the 
search continues to narrow down. The critical point here is finding alternative keywords that could 
describe the same point originally searched.  
Wilhelm and Kaunelis (2005) gave an example to  draw    an  analogy for using different words to focus 
the research more. Wilhelm and Kaunelis’s topic was “cheating on the Internet,” and they started the 
search by using the keyword “cheating.” As they searched more and needed   to find more articles 
about the topic, they realized that they needed   to change the keyword they used first for searching 
“cheating” to alternative words that could lead to finding more related articles. Wilheim and Kaunelis 
assembled a list of keywords they used to find articles about the topic they were researching. Figure 5 
summarizes the list of keywords they used for their search. This led to finding relevant articles di-
rectly related to their research topic. 
Cheating Academics Stopping Technology 
Plagiarism Students Combating Higher education 
Detecting Computer software Dishonesty Colleges 
Preventing Internet Ethics Academic 
Deterring Paper mills University Defining 
Figure 5 – Key Search Concepts and Terms 
Note. Key search terms used to research ‘cheating’ on the   Internet (Wilhelm and Kaunelis, 2005)  
IDENTIFY ELECTRONIC DATABASES FOR SEARCH 
A literature review could take different turns depending on the remaining writing and literature 
search. However, it will most likely take successive searches to find sufficient literature to include in 
the writing finally. Searching the web can be done either through search engines or a  library database 
(Liu et al., 2018). Internet search engines are more known among internet surfers, and people use 
them for many different searches. However, searching library databases is less known, and questions 
could arise if there are differences among the databases and which to use at later stages of the 
search.  
Typical library databases related to education can include ERIC, Wilson Education Abstracts, 
ProQuest Education Journals, and   Professional Development Collection (from EBSCOhost). Busi-
ness-related databases include ABI/INFORM (from ProQuest), Business Source Premier (from EB-
SCOhost), LexisNexis Academic, and Business and Company Resource Center (from Gale/Thom-
son) (Wilhelm & Kaun   elis, 2005). These library databases can be general or subject-specific (Chen et 
al., 2020).  
Conventional wisdom dictates that searching general databases will be a good place to start the 
search because it yields a  large volume of articles. But the catch here is that searching these databases 
could result in a lot of unrelated information and less directly relevant information about the topic. 
The nature of the literature search may necessitate searching for topics specific to the field of study 
being researched (Bratt, 2018).   

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
446 
Another factor to consider when selecting a library database for search is the availability of key fea-
tures that are provided. Besides the specificity of the subject, library databases can be preferred 
based on the features they provide for searching and recording the results. Some of the preferable 
features available in library databases include (Wilhelm & Kaunelis. 2005): 
- Availability of PDF files to download 
- The number of logical operators that are used to limit the search in the database 
- Ability to use the cite feature where the database list the citation as selected based on the 
writing style (APA, MLA, Chicago, and others) 
- Ability to link to articles listed in their bibliography and also to similar articles about similar 
topics,   
Last, we recommend conducting time-bound studies when searching for references from databases. 
Unless seminal in nature, we recommend articles be ignored if they were published more than the 
past half-a-dozen or so years. Given the fact that new material is constantly published and made 
available for review and that databases can have    source articles published globally, it is   reasonable to 
expect that material published a decade or so ago is now old and has been refreshed. So, we submit 
that a researcher should not spend time sourcing and reviewing older material when there is a pleth-
ora of new material available. This approach will help limit the number of articles that one would re-
view and is , therefore, a small step in curtailing the   endless loop in which some researchers find 
themselves. The only exception is seminal work. As and when seminal work needs to be adequately 
referenced, it logically makes sense to research and read it, irrespective of when that work was pub-
lished. 
SNOWBALLING 
Snowballing is a term often used in different conversations with different contexts. However, the 
word means one general thing that people in different fields of study can use for their own purpose. 
So, it is prudent first to define what it means and how it is applied here in the literature review. We b -
ster’s dictionary defined snowballing as “to increase, accumulate, expand, or multiply at a rapidly ac-
celerating rate” (Merriam-Webster, n.d. b ).   
Snowballing in literature review refers to searching more literature to find additional relevant infor-
mation to the research topic so  as  to include and cite more information in the chapter or sections of 
the   literature review (Wohlin, 2016). The goal is to find relevant information on the research topic 
and include it in the literature review. Snowballing can be accomplished either by searching forward 
(forward snowballing), searching backward (backward snowballing), or searching relevant articles. All 
three ways of snowballing can be helped using electronic databases and search engines.  
Forward snowballing aims at finding articles that reference or cite the article being reviewed (Badam-
pudi et al., 2015). In other words, while the researcher reviews one article (We can call it Article A), 
the researcher can find articles B, C, and D that cite article A. Citing or referencing article A may in-
dicate that more relevant information can be found by reviewing the other articles. Since the article 
was cited by other    articles (B, C, and D in this case), the researcher can find more relevant infor-
mation by reading the other articles (in this case, article   s B, C, and D). Library databases make this 
snowballing easier – they often provide a list of articles that reference the article being reviewed, and 
the researcher can click on them and review them. An advantage of forward snowballing that can be 
noted here is that    forward snowballing provides a list of articles published more recently or at least 
after the   first article was published (Felizardo et    al. , 2016).  
Backward snowballing can be done by searching the references section of the articles being reviewed 
to find articles relevant to the research (Felizardo et al. , 2016). Some library databases and search en-
gines offer a clickable reference section (which    mea  ns when   clicked, it displays the referenced article). 
In this case, it makes it easier for the researcher to review the cited articles – they can click on the ar-
ticle, view the content, and decide whether to add it as a reference. The backward snowballing 

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
447 
searches resources in the reference section; thus, it is published before the date of writing the litera-
ture review and before the date of the article being examined by the researcher. 
Figure 6 shows a view of forward and backward snowballing to illustrate the difference between the 
two snowballing methods. 
 
Figure 6 – Backward and forward snowballing 
Searching for relevant articles is another feature that is offered in electronic databases. When search-
ing for a particular topic or keyword, the library databases display a list of hits for the keyword. They 
list a link labeled “relative articles” or something similar that can be clicked and further searched. 
When clicked, the search can continue, and the researcher can find more relevant articles, and the 
search can continue. Figure 7 depicts the three methods of snowballing used in finding literature 
while    searching library databases: forward snowballing, backward snowballing, and finding relevant 
articles. 
 
Figure 7 – Snowballing Methods in Library Database Searches 
All three methods are helpful and easy to use, but the ease of use of it may make it addictive – that 
is, researchers will get bogged down by looking at an article, looking at relevant articles, then finding 
more relevant articles, and continuing the clicking and the finding of more information. Thus, it be-
comes critical to start writing even on a smaller scale.  
Snowballing in 
literature review
Forward 
snowballing
Backward 
snowballing
Related 
literature
Forward 
Cited by 
Searching 
SNOWBALLING 
Backward 
Reference 
Searching 

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
448 
WRITING SMALL 
The point that can be said about writing a literature review is that students will read a lot of material, 
indeed read a lot more than what they will write (Okoli, 2015). As articles are found, the temptation 
could be to continue reading. I t is a good idea to write some as the search continues. Writing com-
plete sections is not likely at this point because the search and iteration continue. Thus, we recom-
mend writing some, preferably based on what was found in the article currently being studied, and 
then   adding to it as the next article(s) are sourced and read. In this exercise, the writing can also be-
come iterative if, each time the student adds to the document, s/he first reviews what was written 
thus far before continuing. However, this form of iteration is a good exercise as it helps reinforce 
prior material and prevents the student from advertently writing something covered in an earlier ref-
erence. 
Writing some text at this point is not to be confused with the focused writing of the dissertation 
chapter. At this stage, the writing can be compared to doodling, which some may do manually. Doo-
dling, although it is mainly characterized as being bored and is a way to get out of boredom, doodling 
can be used constructively as well. It can help us remember information. Writing some as the litera-
ture review continues will help jot down some information that can work as reminders for later big-
time writing.  
Figure 8 illustrates the steps that are typically practiced during the repetition and iteration of the liter-
ature review. It  shows the repetition (iteration) while writing the literature review. It  reveals that it 
starts by selecting keywords to search library databases and continues by writing some of what was 
found. That cycle could continue for some time, but it has to end at some point, and the focus has to 
shift to writing.   
 
Figure 8 – A show of  the iteration process in the literature review 
BRANCHING OUT OF THE ITERATION – FOCUS ON WRITING 
Once the decision is made to start the writing, the heavy lifting begins to translate the piles of re-
viewed documents into meaningful, understandable writing for chapter two. Writing the literature re-
view is an arduous, grueling, and difficult, and nothing we say in this paper is meant to indicate other-
wise. To add more complexity to the issue, we also note another difficulty that faces the writers once 
they start writing –writer’s block. Figure 9 depicts cynically the stages and frustration that accompany 
going through the phases of writer’s block. 
Selecting 
Keywords
Choosing 
Database
Forward 
Snowballin
g
Relevant 
articles
Backward 
Snowballing
Write 
Small

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
449 
 
Figure 9 – Cynical way of  representing the writer’s block (Cham, 2014) 
Huston (1998, p. 93) called it the “white page terror” and described it as “a stress reaction that para-
lyzes the ability to put thoughts into words.” Castillo (2014) suggested that most writers (even long-
practiced writers) experience this in one way or another. Bastug et al. (2017) noted that writer’s block 
is related to certain cognitive and affective issues in the writing process. These issues intensify when 
writing doctoral dissertations, particularly in the literature review (Rose & Rose, 2009). For doctoral 
dissertations, the difficulties are more complicated due to the rigid rules and the shifting focus associ-
ated with writing doctoral dissertations (Rose, 1980). 
There are many causes of writer’s block. It could be related to unrealistic expectations (Huston, 
1998) where writers expect to write a large amount of the literature in one session or to finish an er-
ror-free review in the same session. Lowering these expectations and putting them in a realistic image 
of the long and arduous writing of the chapter literature review could be helpful (Tubbs, 2017). 
Despite the difficulties associated with writer’s block, students need to progress and build upon what 
was reviewed. Taking the whole writing of  the chapter on literature review as a one-step would not 
be possible for most researchers (Castillo, 2014). It could be counterproductive if attempted to do so 
(Huston, 1998). Instead, breaking down the   writing process into smaller, more manageable steps will 
be more attainable.   
Ali and Pandya (2021) tackled the issue of writing a research problem statement (a crucial step in 
starting to write doctoral dissertations) by breaking down the process into four stages. The suggested 
stages by Ali and Pandya start with writing simple statements to continue providing more support 
and then to the finalization stage. Regarding writing the literature review, a similar approach could be 
followed from the general standpoint but a different four stages that are more fit for writing the 
chapter on literature review. We suggest the following four steps to be followed in the writing of the 
literature review: 
• Develop a rough outline 
• Start t   he crude writing process 
• Connect ideas 
• Finalize the writing 
DEVELOP A ROUGH OUTLINE 
Starting by developing a rough, sketchy outline will be a good first step in the venture to writing the 
literature review chapter. Although a good number of sections in the    literature review dissertation 

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
450 
chapter are  specified, developing an outline that would include more than just a listing of the sections 
in the chapter can be helpful. A thorough outline goes beyond what was described before as doo-
dling ideas should be developed. I nstead, some complete sentences may   need to be phrased in each 
section, although we do not suggest that the sentences and phrases be complete or connected here. 
The idea is to get moving with a rough outline and start the writing.  
Lovering (2017) stressed the importance of developing a rough outline in writing research and ex-
plained these benefits that could be gained from developing a rough outline that could include the 
following. 
• A rough outline assists in giving ideas about the structure of the paper and seeing if the in-
formation flows smoothly. 
• The rough outline helps in selecting a better way to organize the information needed to be 
presented and the analysis and conclusion from the information that was gathered. 
• A clearer picture of the direction of the writing could be drawn after drawing the draft, thus, 
clearing the way for a smoother writing 
• A rough outline could change over time as the writing continues, new ideas emerge, and dif-
ferent old ideas may need to be taken out and so to continue the cycle of writing 
THE CRUDE WRITING PROCESS  
What is meant by crude writing is simply to write and write more. Webster’s dictionary defined crude 
as: “marked by the primitive, gross, or elemental or by uncultivated simplicity or vulgarity” (Merriam-
Webster, n.d. a).  Our interpretation of this definition emph   asizes the primitive and the elemental 
parts as   applied to writing a literature review to build out the   chapter. The    interesting thing about 
writing is that it connects the mind with the arms and   hands ( A. Becker, 2006). So, continuing the 
writing may be a good idea even if what was written does not make clear sense.    The important point 
is to write the ideas reviewed and translate what was reviewed into simple writing. The emphasis here 
is  on simple writing to keep the writing flow going. As more ideas are written, more connections to 
other ideas emerge, and the writing will be a step close to completion. Other tasks like following the 
correct formatting and checking references and citations could be postponed to a later stage for the 
sake of the continuation of writing. The point to be emphasized here is that writing continues, and 
as more writing is done, new ideas emerge, and these ideas need to be connected to give room for 
more writing.  
CONNECTING IDE AS 
Next  , we suggest connecting ideas    that were written in the previous step. Connecting the basic sen-
tences     written in the crude-writing step to make full paragraphs helps in proceeding with the writing. 
It is also helpful to check the flow of writing and how the work is progressing. Ideas can emerge 
from the beginning and through the different sections as the writing continues.  
Connecting ideas can be addressed at the writing and subject levels of the topic being discussed. The 
University of Melbourne (n.d.) published an article that suggested connecting ideas at the sentence 
and paragraph levels. Most notable from these suggestions are ideas about the connectedness used at 
th e sentence and paragraph levels. According to Melbourne University, these connectedness words or 
phrases present the ideas clearly and cohesively. Some software tools (like Grammarly) may help with 
this, but it is no substitute for a thorough review by the writer.  
Connecting ideas need to be taken care of at the topic level as well to ensure that the information 
presentation flows clearly and consistently. Wiesner-Groff (2021) suggested dividing the writing into 
main topics and sub-topics. Wiesner-Groff also suggested dividing the writing according to a struc-
ture that links the different topics (main topic and subtopic). Hence, the reader clearly understands 
the main topic and how the sub-topics support them.  

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
451 
FINALIZATION STAGE 
Thi s is   the last sage that we suggest to be followed. At this stage, we suggest going through all  that 
has been written and   ensuring it is all correctly stated and all points are correctly aligned and con-
nected. The main points to check at this stage include: 
- Checking proper formatting (APA or others)  
- Checking that the references are properly cited 
- Check the clarity of the flow of information 
- Checking for punctuation  
- Checking for completeness, all ideas that need to be included are properly included and cited 
- Cross-check the citations and the references ensuring all references are cited and all citations 
have    a corresponding reference. 
A good idea here is to check with assessment rubrics if  they are available in academic programs for 
which the dissertation is being prepared. Assessment rubrics may serve different purposes. Cabig   ao 
(2021) identified three questions that rubrics could answer: 
1- What do educators want students to know and be able to do? 
2- How well do we want students to know and be able to apply or use a skill in a concept? 
3- How well teachers and other scorers determine when a learner knows a concept and does an 
activity well 
 
De Silva (2014) echoed the same ideas about rubrics and noted further that rubrics affect perfor-
mance in writing. Despite these notes, a point is that not all academic programs have rubrics (Agu et 
al., 2015). It could be worthwhile to consult checklists and rubrics published for this purpose. For ex-
ample, Leite et al., 2019) prepared an elaborate literature review checklist that included many items. 
These can be consulted to ensure that the literature review chapter is complete. At the same time, ru-
brics could be subject to  wide disagreement on what is being covered and how the items are judged. 
In a case like this, the research could be helped more by double-checking the rubrics if available. At 
the same time, it would be more robust if a manual check of all the sections of the   literature reviews 
chapter is completed both ways, along with checking the rubrics. 
Figure 10 shows a view of the steps suggested in these sections about starting the writing and   then 
completing the finalization stage. 
 
Figure 10: Suggested four steps for writing the literature review 
PUTTING IT TOGETHER 
After going through the steps to explain and elaborate on the different points that need to be ad-
dressed in organizing and writing the literature that was collected, it is time to show all these steps 
together in one figure. Showing the figures together gives a clearer   glimpse of the four phases that 
were discussed in this paper. It also works as an effective summary of what was covered earlier in the 
paper. 
The result of what was intended in this study is presented in the form of a figure (Figure 11) that 
shows the four phases we covered. The first figure is about identifying the prerequisites for writing 
the literature review. The figure has a   waterfall format    to show the preference for coverage. The 
Develop 
roough 
outline
Crude 
writing 
Process
Connecting 
Ideas
Finalization 
Stage

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
452 
second shows the corequisites, suggesting skills that would help with organizing the literature. The 
third figure is presented circularly to show the repetitive nature of these steps. The fourth is the writ-
ing process which we divided into four sections for simpler management of the reviewed literature 
and the review’s writing. All four figures are combined into one figure below to present one glimpse 
of what was covered in this paper.  
+ 
Figure 11 –    Putting it   Together, Phases of  Writing Chapter 2 of  Doctoral Dissertation 
SUMMARY AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH 
Writing the literature review chapter of doctoral dissertations is an arduous process that could last a 
long time and has the potential to make or break a dissertation. The main contributing factor to the 

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
453 
failure to complete the literature review chapter is a lack of knowledge about what goes on in a litera-
ture review from two viewpoints: writing and preparation. This paper attempted to fill this gap and 
explained the factors that go into the writing of a literature review from the following perspectives: 
- To clarify what is needed to learn about literature review before starting it 
- What is helpful to have during the review of the literature 
- The repetitive nature of reading literature and recording reviews 
- Overcoming the writer’s block and focusing on the writing process 
In our view, our coverage of the literature review in this paper helps organize the literature review 
and makes known all factors related to the writing of the literature review, which students have major 
difficulties in completing. However, there are other sections that students have challenges with  , and 
we feel we can help. A major challenge that students have difficulty with is aligning the major sec-
tions of chapter one in the doctoral dissertations. Aligning these sections of chapter one proved to 
be a major challenge for many students. Such correct alignment could prove to be a major turna-
round if completed properly during the writing of  the   doctoral dissertation. We feel that we have the 
expertise that we can provide suggestions and give ideas on how to align the main sections of chap-
ter one and then continue a smoother ride toward the completion of writing the dissertation. So, we 
plan to shift the focus of writing to chapter one, and we plan on writing on how to align the main 
sections of chapter one of doctoral dissertations.  
REFERENCES 
Agosti, M., & Fer ro, N. (2007). A formal model of annotations of digital content. ACM Transactions on Infor-
mation Systems (TOIS), 26(1), 3-es. https://doi.org/10.1145/1292591.1292594  
Agu, N. N., Omenyi, A. S., & Odimegwu, C. (2015). Evaluation of doctorate dissertation in Nigerian universi-
ties: Do faculties provide and use explicit criteria/rubrics? International Journal of  Technology and Inclusive Edu-
cation, 4(1), 574-578. https://doi.org/10.20533/ijtie.2047.0533.2015.0074  
Ali, A., & Pandya, S. (2021). A four stage framework for the development of a research problem statement in 
doctoral dissertations. International Journal of  Doctoral Studies, 16, 469-485. https://doi.org/10.28945/4839  
Badampudi, D. , Wohlin, C., & Petersen, K. (2015, April). Experiences from using snowballing and database 
searches in systematic literature studies. In Proceedings of  the    19th International Conference on Evaluation and As-
sessment in Software Engineering (pp. 1-10). https://doi.org/10.1145/2745802.2745818   
Bandura, A.    (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning. Educational Psychologist, 
28(2), 117-148. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep2802_3
  
Bandura, A.    (2006). Guide for constructing self-efficacy scales. Self-Efficacy Beliefs of  Adolescents, 5(1), 307-337. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep2802_3
  
Baptista, A., Frick, L., Holley, K., Remmik, M., & Tesch, J.  (2015). The doctorate as an original contribution to  
knowledge: Considering relationships between originality, creativity, and innovation. Frontline Learning Re-
search, 3(3), 55-67. 
Bastug, M., Ertem, I. S.,    & Hasan, K. K. (2017). A phenomenological research study on writer’s block: causes, 
processes, and results. Education & Training, 59(6), 605-618. https://doi.org/10.1108/ET-11-2016-0169  
Bates, J. ,   Best, P. ,    McQuilkin, J. ,   & Taylor, B.   (2017). Will web search engines replace bibliographic databases in 
the systematic identification of research?. The Journal of  Academic Librarianship, 43(1), 8-17. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2016.11.003  
Becker, A.    (2006). A review of writing model research based on cognitive processes. In A. Horning & A. 
Becker (Eds.), Revision: History, theor y, and practice (pp. 25-49). Parlor Press. https://wac.colos-
tate.edu/docs/books/horning_revision/chapter3.pdf  
Becker, D.  A., & Chiware, E.    R. (2015). Citation analysis of masters’ theses and doctoral dissertations: Balanc-
ing library collections with students’ research information needs. The Journal of  Academic Librarianship, 41(5), 
613-620. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2015.06.022 

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
454 
Beliga, S. (2014). Keyword extraction: A review of  methods and approaches. University of Rijeka, Department of Infor-
matics, Rijeka. 
Bratt, S. (2018). Digital library keyword analysis for visualization education research. Journal of  Applied Research 
in Higher Education, 10(4), 595-611. https://doi.org/10.1108/JARHE-03-2018-0047   
Breitenbach, E.    (2019). Evaluating a model to  increase doctorate program completion rates: A focus on social 
connectedness and structure. International Journal of Doctoral Studies, 14(1), 217-236. 
https://doi.org/10.28945/4239
  
Brocke, J.  V., Simons, A., Niehaves, B.,    Niehaves, B.,    Reimer, K., Plattfaut, R., & Cleven, A.    (2009). We are re-
constructing the giant: On the importance of rigor in documenting the literature search process. In Proceed-
ings of ECIS 2009. https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2009/161  
Bruning, R., Dempsey, M., Kauffman, D. F., McKim, C., & Zumbrunn, S. (2013). Examining dimensions of 
self-efficacy for writing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(1), 25. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029692
 
Buchanan, G., McKay, D. , & Levitt, J.  (2015, June). Where my books go: Choice and place in digital reading. In 
Proceedings of  the    15th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (pp. 17-26). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2756406.2756917 
Cabigao, J.  (2021). Development and validation of a proposed model rubric in rating written outputs at the 
graduate school level. Development, 5(4), 122-131. 
Castillo, M. (2014). Writer’s block. American Journal of  Neuroradiology, 35(6), 1043-1044. 
https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A3729  
Cham, J.  (2014). Writing. Phdcomics.com. https://phdcomics.com/comics/archive.php?comicid=1732 
Chen, C., Yang, B.,    & Zhao, C. (2020, April). Keywords extraction based on word relevance degrees. In Proceed-
ings of  the    2020 5th International Conference on Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence (pp. 60-65). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3395260.3395262  
Columbaro, N. L.   (2009). e-Mentoring possibilities for online doctoral students: A literature review. Adult Learn-
ing, 20(3-4), 9-15. https://doi.org/10.1177/104515950902000305  
De Silva, R. (2014). Rubrics for assessment: Their effects on ESL students’ authentic task performance. 4th 
CELC Symposium Proceedings, National University of Singapore. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publica-
tion/289506227_Rubrics_for_Assessment_Their_Effects_on_ESL_Students%27_Authentic_Task_Per-
formance  
De Villiers, C., Venter, E.    R., & Hsiao, P.  C. K. (2017). Integrated reporting: background, measurement issues, 
approaches and an agenda for future research. Accounting & Finance, 57(4), 937-959. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/acfi.12246  
Denscombe, M. (2017). The good research guide: For small-scale social research projects. Open University Press; 
McGraw-Hill Education (UK). 
Ebrahim, N. A.    (2012). Approach to conduct an effective literature review. Academic Collaboration Centre for Publica-
tion Promotion, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. https://works.bepress.com/aleebrahim/65/  
Ewing, H., Mathieson, K., Alexander, J.  L., & Leafman, J.  (2012). Enhancing the acquisition of research skills in 
online doctoral programs: The Ewing model©. Journal of  Online Learning and Teaching, 8(1), 34-44. 
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Enhancing-the-Acquisition-of-Research-Skills-in-The-Ewing-
Mathieson/434f925f4c2479cf13d4c8932ef73ec314631c97  
Felizardo, K. R., Mendes, E., Kalinowski, M., Souza, É.    F. ,    & Vijaykumar, N. L.   (2016, September). Using for-
ward snowballing to  update systematic reviews in software engineering. In Proceedings of  the    10th 
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (pp. 1-6). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2961111.2962630  
Ferrari, R. (2015). Writing narrative style literature reviews. Medical Writing, 24(4), 230-235. 
https://doi.org/10.1179/2047480615Z.000000000329  
Gilmour, R., & Cobus-Kuo, L.   (2011). Reference management software: A comparative analysis of four prod-
ucts. Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship, 66, 63-75. https://doi.org/10.29173/istl1521  

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
455 
Harzing, A.    W.  K., & Van der Wal, R. (2008). Google Scholar as a new source for citation analysis. Ethics in sci-
ence and environmental politics, 8(1), 61-73. https://doi.org/10.3354/esep00076  
Huston, P.  (1998). Resolving writer’s block. Canadian Fa m i l y Physician, 44, 92-97. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2277565/  
Jacobs, R. L.   (2013). Developing a dissertation research problem: A guide for doctoral students in human re-
source development and adult education. New Horizons in Adult Education and Human Resource Development, 
25(3), 103-117. https://doi.org/10.1002/nha3.20034
  
Jalali, S.,    & Wohlin, C. (2012, September). Systematic literature studies: Database searches vs. backward snow-
balling. In Proceedings of  the    2012 ACM-IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and 
Measurement (pp. 29-38). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1145/2372251.2372257  
Kable, A. K., Pich, J. ,   & Maslin-Prothero, S. E.    (2012). A structured approach to  documenting a search strategy 
for publication: A 12 step guideline for authors. Nurse Education Today, 32(8), 878-886. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2012.02.022  
Kushkowski, J.  D. , Parsons, K. A., & Wiese, W.  H. (2003). Master’s and doctoral thesis citations: Analysis and 
trends of a longitudinal study. Portal: Libraries and the    Academy, 3(3), 459-479. 
https://doi.org/10.1353/pla.2003.0062  
Kraus, S.,    Breier, M., & Dasí-Rodríguez, S. (2020). The art of crafting a systematic literature review in entrepre-
neurship research. International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 16, 1023-1042. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11365-020-00635-4
   
Leite, D.  F. ,    Padilha, M. A.    S.,    & Cecatti, J.  G. (2019). Approaching literature review for academic purposes: The 
Literature Review Checklist. Clinics, 74, e1403.  https://doi.org/10.6061/clinics/2019/e1403 
 
Levy, Y. ,    & Ellis, T.  J.  (2006). Towards a framework of literature review process in support of information sys-
tems research. In Proceedings of  the  2006 Informing Science and IT  Education Joint Conference (Vol. 26). 
https://doi.org/10.28945/2980  
Linder, S. K., Kamath, G. R., Pratt, G. F. ,    Saraykar, S. S.,    & Volk, R. J.  (2015). Citation searches are more sensi-
tive than keyword searches to  identify studies using specific measurement instruments. Journal of  Clinical 
Epidemiology, 68(4), 412-417. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2014.10.008 
Liu, J. ,   Zamir, H., Li, Y. ,    & Hastings, S. K. (2018). Search systems and their feat  ures: What college students use 
to  find and save information. Library & Information Science Research, 40(2), 118-124. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2018.06.002
  
Lovering, C. (2017, February 21). How to write a rough outline. Pen & the Pad. https://penandthepad.com/write-
rough-outline-8688693.html  
Lunenburg, F.  C., & Irby, B.   J.  (2008). Writing a successful thesis or dissertation: Tips and strategies for  students in the    social 
and behavioral sciences. Corwin Press. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781483329659  
McBrayer, J. S., Melton, T.   D., Calhoun, D. W., Dunbar, M., & Tolman, S. (2018). The correlation between 
self-efficacy and time to  degree completion of educational leadership doctoral students. International Journal 
of Doctoral Studies, 13, 413-439. https://doi.org/10.28945/4138
  
Merriam-Webster. (n.d. a).  Crude. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Retrieved December 22, 2021, from 
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/crude  
Merriam-Webster. (n.d. b). Snowballing. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Retrieved December 12, 2021, from 
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/snowballing 
Nystrand, M. (2006). The social and historical context for writing research. In C. A. MacArthur, S. Graham, & 
J. Fitzgerald (Eds.), Handbook of  writing research (pp. 11-27). The Guilford Press. 
https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2006-07885-001  
Okoli, C. (2015). A guide to  conducting a standalone systematic literature review. Communications of  the    Associa-
tion for  Information Systems, 37(1), 43. https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.03743  

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
456 
Osanloo, A., & Grant, C. (2016). Understanding, selecting, and integrating a theoretical framework in disserta-
tion research: Creating the blueprint for your “house”. Administrative Issues Journal: Connecting Education, Prac-
tice, and Research, 4(2), 12-26. https://aij.scholasticahq.com/article/7-understanding-selecting-and-integrat-
ing-a-theoretical-framework-in-dissertation-research-creating-the-blueprint-for-your-house  
Paré, G., Tr udel, M. C., Jaana, M., & Kitsiou, S. (2015). Synthesizing information systems knowledge: A typol-
ogy of literature reviews. Information & Management, 52(2), 183-199. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2014.08.008  
Paul, J. ,   & Criado, A.    R. (2020). The art of writing literature review: What do we know and what do we need to  
know?. International Business Review, 29(4),  101717. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2020.101717  
Pearson, J. ,   Buchanan, G., & Thimbleby, H. (2009, September). Improving annotations in digital documents. 
Proceedings of  the Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, 13th European Conference, ECDL 2009, 
Corfu, Greece (pp. 429-432). https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221176014_Improving_Annota-
tions_in_Digital_Documents  
Pearson, J. ,   Buchanan, G., Thimbleby, H., & Jones, M. (2012). The digital reading desk  : A lightweight approach 
to  digital notetaking. Interacting with Computers, 24(5), 327-338. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intcom.2012.03.001  
Randolph, J.  (2009). A guide to  writing the dissertation literature review. Practical Assessment, Research, and Evalua-
tion, 14(1), Article 13. https://doi.org/10.7275/b0az-8t74  
Rose, M. (1980). Rigid rules, inflexible plans, and the stifling of language: A cognitivist analysis of writer’s 
block. College Composition and Communication, 31(4), 389-401. https://doi.org/10.2307/356589  
Rose, M., & Rose, M. A.    (2009). Writer’s block: The cognitive dimension. SIU Press.  
Rowe, F.  (2014). What literature review is not: diversity, boundaries and recommendations. European Journal of  
Information Systems, 23(3), 241-255. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2014.7  
Sarialtin, H. (2015). Benchmarking as a quality assurance tool and its application to  higher education (A  con-
ceptual framework). The Online Journal of Quality in Higher Education, 2(3), 15-26. 
Schoenfeld, A.    J. ,   Sturgeon, D.  J. ,   Burns, C. B.,    Hunt, T.  J. ,   & Bono, C. M. (2018). Establishing benchmarks for 
the volume-outcome relationship for common lumbar spine surgical procedures. The Spine Journal, 18(1), 
22-28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2017.08.263
 
Shaffril, H. A.    M., Samsuddin, S. F. ,    & Samah, A.    A.    (2020). The ABC of systematic literature review: The basic 
methodological guidance for beginners. Quality & Quantity, 4, 1-28. 
Siddiqi, S.,    & Sharan, A.    (2015). Keyword and keyphrase extraction techniques: A literature review. International 
Journal of  Computer Applications, 109(2). https://doi.org/10.5120/19161-0607  
Sparrow, S. M. (2004). Describing the    ball: Improve teaching by   using rubrics – Explicit grading criteria. University of New 
Hampshire Scholar’s Repository. 
https://scholars.unh.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1031&con-
text=law_facpub  
Stadtlander, L.   M., Sickel, A., & Salter, D. (2020). Online doctoral student research and writing self-efficacy in a 
publishing internship. Higher Learning Research Communications, 10(1), 4. 
https://doi.org/10.18870/hlrc.v10i1.1170
  
Terrell, S. R. (2015). Writing a proposal for  your dissertation: Guidelines and examples. Guilford Publications.  
Torraco, R. J.  (2005). Writing integrative literature reviews: Guidelines and examples. Human Resource Development 
Review, 4(3), 356-367. https://doi.org/10.1177/1534484305278283 
Torraco, R. J.  (2016). Writing integrative literature reviews: Using the past and present to  explore the future. Hu-
man Resource Development Review, 15(4), 404-428. https://doi.org/10.1177/1534484316671606  
Trinchera, T.  (2002). Cut and paste plagiarism: What it is and what to  do about it. Community & Junior College Li-
braries, 10(3), 5-9.  https://doi.org/10.1300/J107v10n03_02
  
Tubbs, F. (2017, August 21). 7 Ways for  students to overcome writer’s block. https://collegepuzzle.stanford.edu/7-
ways-for-students-to-overcome-writers-block/  

Ali, Pandya, & Varma 
457 
The University of Melbourne. (n.d.). Connecting ideas in writing: How to  connect ideas at the sentence level 
and paragraph level in academic writing. 
https://www.avondale.edu.au/Departments/Library/Academic-
Writing---   connecting-ideas.pdf  
Webster, J. ,   & Watson, R. T.  (2002). Analyzing the past to  prepare for the future: Writing a literature review. 
MIS Quarterly, 26(2), xiii-xxiii. https://www.jstor.org/stable/4132319   
We e, B.   V., & Banister, D.  (2016). How to  write a literature review paper? Transport Reviews, 36(2), 278–288. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2015.1065456
  
Wiesner-Groff, A. (2021). Connecting main ideas to related sources & topics. Study.com https://study.com/acad-
emy/lesson/connecting-main-ideas-to-related-sources-topics.html. 
Wilhelm, W.  J. ,   & Kaunelis, D.  (2005). Literature reviews: Analysis, planning, and query techniques. Delta Pi Ep-
silon Journal, 47(2), 91-106. 
Wohlin, C. (2014, May). Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a replication in software 
engineering. EASE 14: Proceedings of  the 18th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software 
Engineering (pp. 1-10). https://doi.org/10.1145/2601248.2601268   
Wohlin, C. (2016, June). Second-generation systematic literature stu dies using snowballing. In Proceedings of  the    
20th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (pp. 1-6). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2915970.2916006  
Xiao, Y. ,    & Watson, M. (2019). Guidance on conducting a systematic literature review. Journal of  Planning Educa-
tion and Research, 39(1), 93-112. https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456x17723971  
  

Writing Doctoral Dissertation Literature Review 
458 
AUTHORS 
Azad Ali, D.Sc., Professor of Information Technology, has more than 30 
years of combined experience in the   areas of financial and information 
systems. He holds a bachelor’s degree in Business Administration from 
the University of Baghdad, an MBA from Indiana University of Pennsyl-
vania, an MPA from the University of Pittsburgh, and a Doctorate of Sci-
ence in Communications and Information Systems from Robert Morris 
University. Dr. Ali’s research interests include service-learning projects, 
web design tools, dealing with isolation in doctoral programs, and curric-
ulum development. Azad has been involved in mentoring doctoral stu-
dents to complete their doctoral dissertations and has so far mentored 
five students to complete their dissertations.  
 
 
Shardul Y. Pandya. Ph.D. After retiring as Tenured Faculty and Sr. Doc-
toral Dissertation Advisor with the School of Business, Technology, and 
Healthcare Administration at Capella University, Dr. Pandya currently 
serves as Adjunct Professor at the American National University and the 
University of the Cumberlands. An Industrial Engineer by training, he 
earned a Ph.D. in Engineering Management from the College of Engi-
neering at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, VA. Over the decades, 
he has worked and consulted at various manufacturing organizations as 
well as in the areas of Data Mining and Database Marketing. The academic Dr. Pandya has pub-
lished, taught university courses at all levels, and approximately 25 doctoral students have successfully 
defended their dissertations under his supervision. His public Linkedin profile is here: 
https://www.linkedin.com/in/shardulpandya/
 
 
 
Umesh C. Varma. D.I.A. Dr. Varma has more than 32 years of teaching expe-
rience in higher education at undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral levels in In-
formation Technology, Computer Information Systems, Computer Science, 
Cyber Security, and Information Assurance. He has designed, developed, and 
implemented several academic programs in various institutions of higher learn-
ing. He has worked with several institutions for program accreditation, outcome 
assessment, and institutional research. He served as a Program Director for 
doctoral programs at the   University of Fairfax before assuming a leadership 
role at American National University. He has also conducted several webinars 
on Cyber Security. He holds undergraduate degrees in General Science, Business Administration, 
Master in Computer Science, and Doctorate in Information Assurance/Cyber Security from India, 
U.K., and United States, respectively. His research interests are Cyber Security Intelligence analytics, 
anti-forensics, covert channel analysis, query optimization, data architecture, and security modeling.