HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH 
METHODOLOGY
ISBN: 978
-
93
-
94198
-
49
-
4
Published and Printed By
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS
Dr. Diwakar Chaudhary
Dr. Rahul Ratnakar Mahamuni
Dr. J. Manjunathan
Ms. VinithaS
S.
 
No
 
Author’s Profile
 
1.
 
 
Dr. Diwakar Chaudhary 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Mangalmay Institute of Management and 
Technology, 
 
Greater Noida, UP
. 
 
Email:
 
diwakarchaudhary2@gmail.com
 
 
 
2.
 
 
Dr. Rahul Ratnakar 
Mahamuni,
 
Assistant Professor,
 
Department of Conservation of Biodiversity,
 
Gopinathrao Munde National Institute of Rural 
Development and Research
 
Maharashtra
. 
 
Email: 
rahulrmahamuni@gmail.com
 
 
 
3.
 
 
Dr. J. Manjunathan, 
 
Assistant Professor, 
 
Department of Biotechnology, 
 
S
chool of Life science, 
 
Vels Institute of Science Technology and 
Advanced Studies, Pallavaram, 
 
Chennai
, Tamil Nadu. 
 
Email: 
jmanjunathan@gmail.com
 
 
4.
 
 
Vinitha S
 
Assistant 
P
rofessor
 
Department of 
P
sychology
 
Marudhar kesari Jain college for women, 
Vaniyambadi
, 
Tamilnadu
 
Email: 
vinithas@mkjc.in
 
 
 

Copyright: All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or 
reprinted  without  the  prior  written  permission  of  the  contributors  or 
publisher. 
 
First Edition: June, 2024.  
 
ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
 
Place of Publication: Vaniyambadi, Tirupattur District, Tamil Nadu, India. 
 
 
 
HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH 
METHODOLOGY 
 
  Authors 
 
Dr. Diwakar Chaudhary 
Dr. Rahul Ratnakar Mahamuni 
Dr. J. Manjunathan 
Ms. Vinitha S 
 
 
 
Published and Printed By 
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published and Printed By 
 
 
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS 
Vaniyambadi, Tirupattur District, Tamil Nadu, INDIA 
https://salihapublications.wordpress.com/  
E. mail: salihapublications2016@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
AUTHORS PROFILE 
They   have   sufficient   teaching   and 
research   experience   with   expertise   in 
HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH 
METHODOLOGY. They  have  written  this 
book for  the  benefits  of undergraduate 
and postgraduate students.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
S. No 
Author’s Profile 
1.  Dr. Diwakar Chaudhary  
Assistant Professor  
Mangalmay Institute of Management and 
Technology,  
Greater Noida, UP.  
Email: diwakarchaudhary2@gmail.com  
 
2.  
Dr. Rahul Ratnakar Mahamuni, 
Assistant Professor, 
Department of Conservation of Biodiversity, 
Gopinathrao Munde National Institute of Rural 
Development and Research 
Maharashtra.  
Email: rahulrmahamuni@gmail.com  
 
3.  
Dr. J. Manjunathan,  
Assistant Professor,  
Department of Biotechnology,  
School of Life science,  
Vels Institute of Science Technology and 
Advanced Studies, Pallavaram,  
Chennai, Tamil Nadu.  
Email: jmanjunathan@gmail.com 
 
4.  
Vinitha S 
Assistant Professor 
Department of Psychology 
Marudhar kesari Jain college for women, 
Vaniyambadi, Tamilnadu 
Email: vinithas@mkjc.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PREFACE 
Research  methodology is  a  structured  and  scientific 
approach    used    to    collect,    analyze,    and    interpret 
quantitative   or   qualitative   data   to   answer   research 
questions  or  test  hypotheses.  A research  methodology  is 
like  a  plan  for  carrying  out  research  and  helps  keep 
researchers   on   track   by   limiting   the   scope   of   the 
research.  Several  aspects  must  be  considered  before 
selecting  an  appropriate  research  methodology,  such  as 
research limitations and ethical concerns that may affect 
your research. 
The  research  methodology  section  in  a  scientific 
paper   describes   the   different   methodological   choices 
made, such as the data collection and analysis methods, 
and why these choices were selected. The reasons should 
explain    why    the    methods    chosen    are    the    most 
appropriate  to  answer  the  research  question.  A  good 
research  methodology  also  helps  ensure  the  reliability 
and  validity  of  the  research  findings.  There  are  three 
types  of  research  methodology—quantitative,  qualitative, 
and  mixed-method,  which  can  be  chosen  based  on  the 
research objectives. 
We  welcome  comments  by  readers  of “HANDBOOK 

OF  RESEARCH  METHODOLOGY” for ways  to  improve 
the book and to increase its value. Such suggestions will 
be seriously considered in the preparation of subsequent 
editions. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 
NO 
CONTENTS 
PAGE NO 
1 
BASICS OF RESEARCH 
01 
2 
MIXTURES, SUBSTANCES AND TECHNIQUES 
26 
3 
ANALYTICAL DATA 
84 
4 
STATISTICAL   TREATMENT   OF   FINITE 
SAMPLES 
124 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER- I 
BASICS OF RESEARCH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 2 
 
 
Meaning of research 
Research  is  the  process  of  discovering  new  information  in 
order to answer a question. The word research consists of the 
parts  re  (again)  and  search  (find),  which  suggest  that  we  are 
engaging in an activity to investigate an issue again or that we 
are seeking new knowledge about something. If a Front Office 
Executive wants to become a great sales expert in addition to 
being  a  host,  he  or  she  must  learn  about  the  hotel's  facilities, 
timetables,   and   important   elements   of   the   products   and 
services offered. 
Definitions of research 
Research  is  manipulation  of  things,  concepts  or  symbols  for 
the   purpose   of   generalizing   to extend,   correct   or   verify 
knowledge,  whether  that  knowledge  aids  in  construction  of 
theory or in the practice of an art (Kothari, C.R.) 
Another definition of research is given by Creswell who states 
that  ―Research  is  a  process  of  steps  used  to  collect  and 
analyse  information  to  increase  our  understanding  of  a  topic 
or issue‖.  It consists of three  steps:  Pose  a  question, collect 
data  to  answer  the  question,  and  present  an  answer  to  the 
question. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 3 
 
 
NATURE OF RESEARCH  
Research,   as   explained   earlier,   is   systematic   and   critical 
investigation of   phenomena.   It   identifies   the   variables, 
collects and analyses data on such variables to find answers to 
certain  crucial  questions.  These  answers  contribute  further  to 
increase  human  knowledge.  Orderliness  is  the  hallmark  of 
research. Research has to have an organic unity. This becomes 
essential  if  the  knowledge  which  accrues  from  research  is  to 
be  verified;  for,  it  must  be  verifiable  by  anybody  who  takes 
the  trouble  to  do  so.  In  fact,  research  is  considered  to  be  a 
formal, systematic,   intensive   process   of   carrying   on   the 
scientific  method  of  analysis.  It  involves  a  more  systematic 
structure  of  investigating,  usually  resulting  in  some  sort  of 
formal record of procedures and results or conclusions.  
There are two main categories of research 
methods: qualitative    research    methods    and    quantitative 
research   methods.   Quantitative   research   methods   involve 
using numbers to measure data. Researchers can use statistical 
analysis to find connections and meaning in the data. 
In   order   to   obtain   results   when   testing   hypotheses   and 
evaluating  data,  researchers  employ  a  variety  of  techniques. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 4 
 
Analysts  and  researchers  employ  quantitative  and  qualitative 
research  methodologies  for  data  interpretation,  such  as  focus 
groups,   interviews,   and   surveys.   This   fosters   a   deeper 
comprehension   of   the   data.   A   research   professional   can 
acquire   fruitful   outcomes   from   their   investigations   by 
employing the most appropriate research method. 
 Characteristics of Research  
The  major  characteristics  of  any  research  are;  objectivity, 
precision,   design   and   verifiability.   Let   us   look   at   these 
attributes more closely:  
Objectivity: Ideally, research is beyond the subjective bias of 
the  researcher.  The  researcher  makes  deliberate  efforts  to 
eliminate  personal preference  resisting  the  temptation  to  seek 
only such data that supports his/her hypothesis. The emphasis 
is   on   testing,   rather   than   proving   the   hypothesis.   The 
researcher   is   willing   to   suspend   personal   judgement   and 
permit  the  data  and  logic  to  lead  independently  to  a  sound 
conclusion.  
Objectivity  is  achieved  through  standardisation  of  research 
instruments,    choosing    appropriate    research    design    and 
analytical tools and ensuring dependability of data.  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 5 
 
Precision: Precision in scientific research is achieved through 
the  uses  of   statistical   methods   and  techniques.   As   such, 
research conclusions convey  the exact  meaning  to  the  reader, 
e.g., measures  of  central  tendency,  variability, correlation, 
regression etc. are the most precise expression in quantitative 
research   which   explains   or   represents   the   truth.   Precise 
language describes the study accurately so that the study may 
be replicated or the results correctly used.  
Design:  In scientific  research,  the  researcher  has  to  have  a 
much specified  design  of  carrying out  the  investigation.  This 
will imply that any scientific inquiry will, in general, undergo 
the following steps: – defining of the problem, – statement of 
the  hypothesis, – collection  and  analysis  of  data testing  and 
confirmation  or  rejection  of  hypothesis,  and – reporting  of 
results.  Only  if  the  research  has  been  carried  out  by  using  a 
specified process, it can be replicated for verification.  
Verifiability: This  is  an  important  characteristic  of  every 
research.  Research  methods  and  findings  presented  to the 
professional   community   for   other   researchers   to   analyse, 
confirm or reject them. Research is a social enterprise and its 
information  is  open  for  public  scrutiny.  This  characteristic  of 
research, i.e., verifiability,   is   related   to   the   criteria   of 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 6 
 
objectivity  and  precision.  Only  through  further  investigation 
or  replication  of  studies  can  the  results  of  a  single  study  be 
confirmed  or  revised.  Through  this  process,  a  body  of  new 
knowledge is developed and new questions identified 
Importance of research 
Research   unfolds   many   unexplored   things   that   stimulate 
working   capability   and   develops   the   understanding   and 
decision-making  of  learners.  Without  research,  one  has  to 
believe  in  his  or  her  intuition  or  imagination  which  can't  be 
accurate.  That  is  why  research  is  important  for  scaling  up 
performance   and   better   results. Here   are   5   reasons   why 
research is important for stimulating better results and lending 
success to the people. 
Research helps to achieve your goal: Many companies have 
achieved  success by conducting research about their  products 
and    services    through    consumer    satisfaction    exercises. 
Through online surveys, companies offer feedback about their 
products  and  services  to  know  customer  satisfaction  and  it 
provides  them  with  an  opportunity  to  tailor  their  businesses 
and improve their services.  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 7 
 
Research reveals new ideas and facts: Research sparks new 
ideas   and   facts;   enables   the   researcher   to   draw   novel 
conclusions  about  his  research  topic.  The  more  deeply  one 
researches a particular subject better he may get into the field 
and   properly   help   position   his   or   her   ideas.   Research 
stimulates  different  ideas  and  helps  build  discerning  and 
analytical concepts. 
Research develops understanding and decision-making:  
It is the most valuable tool to understand the complexities of a 
problem,  disapprove  of  lies,  uphold  truth  and  build  on  to 
create  knowledge  that  is  reliable  and  authentic.  Conducting 
research   develops   a   better   understanding   and   enhances 
decision-making  capabilities.  Researchers analyse the  details 
of   a   project   and   help   take   the   right   and   well-informed 
decisions. 
Research helps understand what's not working: 
Research  provides  you  with  an  opportunity  to  detect  and 
investigate  many  new  things  that  are  not  working  for  your 
project.  Research  helps  you  find  a  new  concept  or  some 
amazing information about any particular topic, it also unfolds 
many   antagonist   elements   not   suitable   for   your   project. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 8 
 
Research   not   only   helps   explore   what   is   beneficial   and 
working for your project, but it also explains different aspects 
that are invalid and not working for your venture. 
Research  builds credibility: Any argument  or  statement 
based  on  imagination  or  intuition  affects  the  reputation  and 
credibility  of  the  subject  and  researcher.  Research  on  the 
subjects’ scales  up  credibility  and  weight  to  it  and  critics 
wouldn't find holes and would appreciate the research project. 
It also helps  boost  the confidence  of the researcher.  Research 
builds   a   solid   foundation   when   novel   ideas   are   studied, 
experimented  and  explained  to  the  learners  and  organizations 
for  accelerating  the  success  rate  to  gain  credibility  for  the 
research project. 
Objective of research 
The  main  purpose  of  research  is  to  discover  answers  to  the 
meaningful   questions   through   scientific   procedures   and 
systematic attempt. 
The main objectives of research are: 
1. To  gain  familiarity  or  to  achieve  new  insights  into  a 
phenomenon. 
2. To  describe  the  accurate  characteristics  of  a  particular 
individual, situation or group. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 9 
 
3. To   determine   the   frequency   with   which   something 
occurs or with which it is associated with other things. 
4. To  test  a  hypothesis  of  a causal relationship  between 
variables. 
What is a research problem? 
It’s a statement that outlines the specific problem, challenge, 
or  question  that  you  try  to  address  or answer.  It  should 
essentially    address what is    the    problem    and why is    it 
important. 
Research problem definition: A research problem is defined 
as    an    area    of    concern    that    requires    a    meaningful 
understanding of a specific topic, a condition, a contradiction, 
or  a  difficulty. So, what  is  research  problem?  A  research 
problem  means finding  answers to  questions or  strengthening 
existing   findings   to   bridge   the   knowledge   gap   to   solve 
problems. 
What is the purpose of a Research problem statement? 
A   problem   statement   in   research   seeks   to   achieve   the 
following: 
1. Introduce  the  importance  of  the  topic  in  the  research 
proposal. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 10 
 
2. Position the problem in an appropriate context. 
3. Provide a framework to analyse and report results. 
 
Selection of Research Problem 
There  are  some suggestions for  the  graduate  students  and 
researchers  which  are  drawn  from  the  different  areas  of 
education, social sciences as well as psychology.  
There  are  two  factors  in  the  selection  of  topic external and 
personal. External criteria involve how the topic is important 
for  the  field,  availability  of  both  data  and  data  collection 
methods and the administration is cooperative or not. Personal 
Criteria means researcher own interest, time and cost. Criteria 
for  selection  of  research  problem  depend on  the  following 
characteristics. 
Personal Inclination. The  chief  motivation  in  the  way  of 
selecting  research  problem  is  the  personal  inclination  of  the 
researcher. If a researcher has personal interest in the topic, he 
would select that problem for his research work. 
Resources Availability. During  the  selection,  a  researcher 
will  see  to  the  resources  available.  If  these  resources  like 
money,  time,  accommodation  and  transport  are  available  to 
the selection place, then the selection of the problem is easy. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 11 
 
Relative Importance. The  importance  and  the  problem  also 
play  a  vital  role  in  the  selection  of  research  problem.  If  the 
problem  is  relatively  important,  then  the  researcher  tends 
towards the selection of the problem. 
Researcher Knowledge. The  researcher  knowledge  should 
play a vital role in the selection of the research problem. The 
wisdom and experience of an investigator is required for well 
collection   of   the   research   data.   He   can   bitterly   select   a 
problem. 
Practicality: Practicality  is  also  responsible  for  the  selection. 
The practical usefulness of the problem is the main motivation 
for a researcher to attend it. 
Time-lines of the Problem. Some problems  take  little  time 
for its solution while others take more time. So, it depends on 
the time in which we have to complete his research work. 
Data Availability. If  the  desired  data  is  available  to  the 
researcher, then the problem would be selected. 
Urgency. Urgency is a pinpoint in the way of the selection of 
research  problem.  Urgent  problem  must  be  given  priority 
because the immediate solution can benefit the people. 
Feasibility. Feasibility  is  also  an  important  factor  for  the 
selection     of     the     research     problem.     The     researcher 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 12 
 
qualification,   training   and   experience   should   match   the 
problem. 
Area Culture. The culture  of the  area  for  which  a  researcher 
conducts  his  research  is  also  responsible  for  the  selection  of 
research problem. 
Characteristic of Research Problem 
Any research is a difficult task to achieve and research needs 
to do a great effort. Selection of research topic is the first step 
to success. 
1. Research   topic   must   be   very   clear   and   easy   to 
understand. It should not distract people. 
2. If   a   topic   is   well defined is   the   only   way   to 
successful   research.   The   topic   should   not   create 
doubt and double impression. 
3. Easy  language  is  a  key  to  success.  Use  technical 
words, if necessary, otherwise focus of simplicity. 
4. Research  title  should  be  according  to  the  rules  of 
titling.   There   are   different   rules   of   titling,   a 
researcher must aware before writing a research title. 
5. While  selecting  a  research  topic  current  importance 
of  a  researcher  should  also  be  considered.  Topic 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 13 
 
should  not  be  obsolete  and  it  should  have  great 
importance in the current day. 
 
Steps to formulate a research problem 
Here are the five basic steps to formulate a research problem: 
1. Identify    the    broad    research    area: Begin    your 
research  by  identifying  a  broad  research  area  based  on 
your   interest,   specialty,   profession,   expertise,   and 
knowledge.   This   area   must   possess   some   kind   of 
significance   regarding your   knowledge   interest   and 
specialty.  For  example,  a  researcher  studying  sports 
education can select areas like football, soccer, hockey, 
and  baseball.  These  are  the  broader  areas  that  can  be 
further subdivided into various research topics to figure 
out marketing strategies. 
2. Divide   the   broad   area   into   sub-areas: After   you 
choose  a  broad  area  to  study,  drill  down  to  a  specific 
topic  that  is  manageable  and  researchable.  To  do  this, 
break down the broad area into sub-areas and choose a 
specific  topic.  For  example,   if  your   broad   area   is 
soccer,  it  can  be  further  divided  into  the  following 
subcategories: 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 14 
 
1. Profile of soccer players 
2. Profile of soccer clubs 
3. Level of soccer clubs 
4. Impact of the club on the city 
5. Revenue generating areas  
6. Sponsors of the soccer clubs 
3. Choose  a  sub-area: It  is  not  possible  to  study  all  the 
sub-areas  due  to  time  and  money  constraints.  Thus, 
choose   one   sub-area   of   interest   and   one   that   is 
manageable  and  feasible  for  you.  The  area  you  select 
must  have  some  research  significance  and  must  be 
significant to your research knowledge. 
4. Formulate  research  questions: After  you  choose  a 
specific   sub-area,   think   about   the   areas   you   must 
explore    and    research    about.    Start    noting    down 
important  questions  that  you  deem  important  for  the 
research  study.  Many questions  may  arise  but  narrow 
down  and  choose  the  most  important  and  impactful 
questions.  The  length  of  the  research  depends  on  the 
number   of   questions   you   formulate.   Choose   the 
questions,  depending  on  the  expected  length  of  your 
research. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 15 
 
5. Set  research  objectives: You  must  draw  a  plan  about 
the objectives of the research that you need to explore. 
The objectives of the research study help to identify the 
research  questions.  There  is  a  difference  between  the 
research   question   and   the   research   objective.   The 
difference   is   the   way   they   are   written.   Research 
questions generally consist of an interrogative tone. On 
the   other   hand,   the   research   objectives   are   aim-
oriented.   They   include   terms   like   to   examine,   to 
investigate, to explore, and to find out.  
 
What is a research objective? 
Research   objectives   describe   what   your   research   project 
intends   to   accomplish.   They   should   guide  every   step   of 
the research  process,  including  how  you collect  data,  build 
your argument, and develop your conclusions. 
Your research objectives may evolve slightly as your research 
progresses,  but  they  should  always  line  up  with  the  research 
carried out and the actual content of your paper. 
Research aims 
A  distinction  is often  made  between  research  objectives  and 
research aims. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 16 
 
A research aim typically refers to a broad statement indicating 
the general purpose of your research project. It should appear 
at  the  end  of  your  problem  statement,  before  your  research 
objectives. 
Your research objectives are more specific than your research 
aim  and  indicate  the  particular  focus  and  approach  of  your 
project. Though you will only have one research aim, you will 
likely have several research objectives. 
Example: Research aim 
To  examine contributory  factors  to  muscle  retention  in  a 
group of elderly people. 
Example: Research objectives 
To   assess   the   relationship   between   sedentary   habits   and 
muscle atrophy among the participants. 
To   determine   the   impact   of   dietary   factors,   particularly 
protein    consumption,    on    the    muscular    health    of    the 
participants. 
To    determine    the    effect    of    physical    activity    on    the 
participants’ muscular health. 
Objectives - Research  problem  is  the  goal,  and  the  objectives 
define  strategies  and  implementation  steps  to  attain  this  goal. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 17 
 
Thus,  it  highlights how you  plan  to  address  your  research 
problem. 
 
 
Meaning of scientific literature 
Scientific literature is the principal medium for 
communicating  the  results  of  scientific  research and,  as  such, 
represents     the     permanent     record     of     the     collective 
achievements of the scientific community over time. 
 
A  literature  review  for  scientific  research  is  a  survey  of 
scientific  books,  scholarly  articles,  and  any  other  systematic 
scientific sources pertinent to a particular issue, area of study, 
or  theory,  in  order  to  provide  a  description,  summary,  and 
evaluation of a concept, school of thought, or ideas relevant to 
the  research  question  under  investigation.  In  addition,  the 
literature  study  familiarises  the  author  with  the  breadth  of 
their   field's   knowledge.   When   included   in   the   paper,   it 
demonstrates   to   the   reader   the   depth   of   the   author's 
comprehension and knowledge of the subject. 
The  scientifically  relevant  literature  in  a  certain  discipline 
includes, among other things, past studies, established schools 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 18 
 
of   thought,   scholarly   papers,   and   scientific   periodicals. 
Literature  reviews  vary  from  discipline  to  discipline.  In  the 
hard  sciences,  the  literature  consists  primarily  of  facts,  and  a 
review  may  consist  merely  of  a  synopsis  of  the  essential 
sources.  In  the  field  of  soft  sciences,  the  survey  gives  an 
overview and synthesis of several schools of thought and their 
interrelationship. A summary or overview is a concise account 
of  the  informative  highlights  from  major  sources,  whereas 
synthesis is the restructuring or reorganisation of the material 
to  inform  the  dissertation's  plan  for  researching  the  research 
problem. 
Data collection 
The data collection technique is different for different types of 
research  design.  There  are  predominantly two  types  of  data: 
(i)  the  primary  data  and  (ii)  the  secondary  data.  Primary  data 
is   one   a   researcher   collects   for   a   specific   purpose   of 
investigating  the  research  problem  at  hand.  Secondary  data 
are ones that have not been collected for the immediate study 
at hand but for purposes other than the problem at hand. 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 19 
 
 
Primary   sources provide   raw   information   and   first-hand 
evidence.  Examples  include  interview  transcripts,  statistical 
data,  and  works  of  art.  A  primary  source  gives  you  direct 
access to the subject of your research. 
Secondary   sources provide   second-hand   information   and 
commentary from other researchers. Examples include journal 
articles,  reviews,  and  academic books.  A  secondary  source 
describes, interprets, or synthesizes primary sources. 
Citation indexes 
Cite  can  be  defined  in  numerous  ways,  but  in  the  context  of 
academic   writing,   it   is   the   acknowledgment   of   another 
person's intellectual property. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 20 
 
Citation  indexes  allow  researchers  to  trace  the  impact  of  an 
article    upon    later    publications.    Besides    including    the 
bibliographic information about an article (author, article title, 
journal  title,  date,  etc.),  citation  indexes  also  provide  each 
article's references or bibliography (the list of sources cited). 
It is essential to keep in mind that citations are required for all 
types  of  information  sources.  Academic  journals,  internet, 
books,   newspapers,   and   magazines   are   among   the   most 
frequently  used  source  types.  However,  there  are  numerous 
alternative options, such as movies, audio recordings, lectures, 
presentations,  personal  interviews,  surveys,  and  photographs. 
Regardless of the sort of source used, a citation is required to 
provide credit to the original author. 
Scientific  Style  and  Format presents  three  systems  for 
referring  to  references  (also  known  as  citations)  within  the 
text  of  a  journal  article,  book,  or  other  scientific  publication: 
1)  citation–sequence;  2)  name–year;  and 3)  citation–name. 
These  abbreviated  references  are  called  in-text  references. 
They refer to a list of references at the end of the document. 
The  system  of  in-text  references  that  you  use  will 
determine  the  order  of  references  at  the  end  of  your 
document. These end references have essentially the same 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 21 
 
format  in  all  three  systems,  except  for  the  placement  of 
the date of publication in the name–year system. 
In  scientific  writing,  we  don't  cite  references  by  using 
footnotes.  Instead,  citations  including  author's  last  name 
and  year  are  inserted  directly  into  the  text,  like  this 
(Kusnick,  1997).  If  there  is  more  than  one  author,  the 
citation  might  look  like  this  (Kusnick  and  Waterstraat, 
1996) or like this (Kusnick and others, 1995). If you use a 
reference  more  than  once,  you  just  insert  the  citation 
again (Kusnick, 1997).  
If you reference several authors in the same sentence, you 
can  list   them  alphabetically  within  the  same   citation 
(Kusnick, 1997; Waterstraat, 1996). If an author has more 
than  one  citation  in  a single  year,  label  them  a,  b,c,  etc. 
after the year (Kusnick, 1997a).  
If you use someone else's stuff for a whole paragraph, cite 
them once in the first sentence and again at the end of the 
paragraph.  If  you  include  a  direct  quote,  put  it  in  quotes 
and  include  the  page  number  in  the  citation  (Kusnick, 
1997a,  p.  37).  Be  sure  to  insert  a  citation  anytime  you 
reference factual  material  or  someone else's opinion.  It is 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 22 
 
better to have too many citations than too few (which can 
be plagiarism). 
The  most frequently  used  citation  style  used  in  science 
is APA  (American  Psychological  Association)  style  or 
Vancouver,  created  by  the  IEEE  (Institute  of  Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers). 
Typical APA style papers have four main sections: 
• Title Page 
• Abstract 
• Main Body 
• References 
Formatting References 
The  reference  list  is  alphabetical,  and  should  be  either  in 
APA bibliographic style, or in a style used by a scholarly 
scientific  journal  (e.g.,  Geological  Society  of  America 
style).  The  style  you  choose  is  less  important  than  being 
consistent. A typical scientific style might look like this: 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 23 
 
Journal article: 
Kusnick,    Judith    E,    1993,    Review    of    Revitalizing 
Undergraduate  Science:  Why  Some  Things  Work  and 
Most  Don't  by  Sheila  Tobias, Thought  and  Action,  v.  9, 
no. 1, p. 145-146. 
American  Psychological  Association.  (2020).  Publication 
manual  of  the  American Psychological  Association (7th 
ed.). https://doi.org/10.1037/0000165-000 
Patent 
      A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, 
which is a product or a process that provides, in general, a 
new  way  of  doing  something,  or  offers  a  new  technical 
solution   to   a   problem.   To   get   a   patent,   technical 
information  about  the  invention  must  be  disclosed  to  the 
public in a patent application. 
     According    to    the    World    Intellectual    Property 
Organization  (WIPO),  patent  literature  is  the  collective 
term    for    relevant    data    containing    research    and 
development  results  that  have  been  applied  or  confirmed 
to  be  a  discovery,  utility  model,  or  industrial  design,  as 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 24 
 
well  as  published  or  unpublished  documents  of  materials 
that protect the rights of the inventor and patentee. 
      Patent    literature    often    refers    to    the    official 
publications  of  each  country's  patent  office,  such as  the 
patent specification, patent gazette, patent abstract, patent 
index,  and  patent  classification  table,  among  others.  It 
should  be  emphasised  that  the  patent  specification  in  the 
new  application  phase  may  consist  of  either  disclosed 
literature or unpublished data (still kept confidential). 
Various types of patents: 
There  are  three  types  of  patents:  invention,  utility  model, 
and industrial design. 
Invention—refers to the novel technical scheme proposed 
for  a  product,  a  method,  or  its  enhancement,  such as  the 
method  or  procedure  for  manufacturing  the  product,  the 
material formula, the medicine formula, etc. 
Utility  model—refers  to  the  new  applicable  technical 
system    proposed    for    the    form,    construction,    or 
combination  thereof  of  a  product,  commonly  referred  to 
in practise as "little invention." 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 25 
 
Industrial  design—refers  to  a  new  design  that is created 
based  on  shape,  pattern,  or  their  combination,  as  well  as 
the  combination  of  colour,  shape,  and  pattern,  and  is 
suitable  for  industrial  use.  This  section  emphasises  the 
"look" of the packing case, packaging bag, and packaging 
box. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 26 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER–II  
MIXTURES, SUBSTANCES AND 
TECHNIQUES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 27 
 
Introduction 
 There  are  various  kinds  of  substances  present  in  nature. 
There  are  three  states  or phases  of  matter - solid,  liquid  and 
gas. Matter can exist in different states, for example water can 
exist  in  solid  state  in  ice,  liquid  state  or  gas  state  in  steam. 
Temperature  and  pressure  are  the  two  important  factors  that 
can  change  the  states  of  matter.  The  matter  can  be  classified 
based  on  the  physical  features  (solid,  liquid  and  gas)  and  on 
the chemical features (mixtures and pure substances). 
 Pure substances can be divided into elements - such as 
sodium,  chlorine,  hydrogen  or  oxygen;  and compounds – 
such  as  sodium  chloride  and  water.  Two  or  more  elements 
chemically  bond  to  form  a molecule. Compounds can  be 
broken to  smaller  substances,  but  elements  cannot  be  broken 
down  to  smaller  ones  because  they  are  made  up  of  atoms 
containing electrons, protons and neutrons. 
 A mixture consists  of  two  or  more  substances  that  are 
physically mixed, but not chemically bonded.  
 Most  of  the  substances  present  around  us  are  not  in  the 
pure form. They are present in mixtures of two or more forms. 
Several  kinds  of  separation  techniques  are  used  to  separate 
different   substances   from   the   mixture.   These   separation 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 28 
 
techniques  are  useful  in  removing  all  the  unwanted  materials 
and  obtain  the  desired  substances  in  a  pure  form.  In  simple 
terms,  we  can  say  that  separation  is  a  process  of  segregation, 
where  unwanted  and  impure  substances  are  removed  from 
essential substances. For example: removal of stones and husk 
from rice, wheat and other food products. 
 Different  methods  of  separation  techniques  are  available 
for  the separation  of  substances  based  on  their  physical  and 
chemical properties. These kinds of separation techniques are 
used  at  home,  factory,  industry,  laboratory,  research  and 
pharmaceutical companies. 
What is a mixture?  
 A  mixture  is  a  combination  of  two  or more  substances, 
combined  together.  The  components  in  the  mixture  may  be 
linked  to  each  other  or  present  separately  to  form  a  blend  of 
solution,  suspension  or  colloid.  They  do  not  undergo  any 
change  and  retain  their  individual  properties.  The  individual 
substances  preserve  the  physical  or  chemical  identity  even 
when  it  is  present  in  the  mixture.  These  physical  or  chemical 
properties   can   be   made   use   to   separate   the   individual 
components from the mixture. 
 For example,  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 29 
 
• Air is  a  mixture  of  various  gases  like nitrogen,  oxygen, 
carbon dioxide and other inert gases. 
• Seawater is a mixture of various salts and water. 
• Crude oil is a mixture of many organic hydrocarbons. 
Types of mixtures 
 
Fig. 1 Types of mixtures 
 We  come  across  different  kinds  of  mixtures  in  our daily 
life.  Mixtures  are  available  in  different  kinds  and  can  be 
identified based on their physical and chemical properties. Let 
us discuss the properties of these mixtures.  There  are  mainly 
two  types  of  mixture:  homogenous mixture  and  heterogenous 
mixture (fig 1). 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 30 
 
Homogenous mixture 
 Homogenous  mixture  can  be  defined  as  the  mixture  of 
different  substances  or  components  with  the  same  property 
and  mixed  uniformly  without  any  boundary.  In  other  words, 
we   can   say   that   a   homogenous   mixture   has   a   uniform 
composition.  The  constituents  in  the  mixture  do  not  have 
physically  distinct  parts  and  is  not  visible.  The  individual 
components are difficult to separate. For example: mixture of 
sugar/salt in water. 
Heterogenous mixture 
 Heterogenous  mixture  can  be  defined  as the  mixture  of 
different substances or components with different property. It 
does   not   have   a   uniform   composition   and   has   visible 
boundaries  between  the  components.  The  constituents  in  the 
mixture  have  physically  distinct  parts  and  are  easily  visible. 
The individual  components  are  easily  separated  from  each 
other. For example: mixture of stones and grains or mixture of 
oil and water. 
 There is a difference between compounds and mixture: 
Compound:  
 A  compound  is  a  pure  substance,  chemically  combined 
with two or more elements. The elements in the compound are 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 31 
 
present   in   a   fixed   ratio   and   cannot   be   altered.   If   the 
composition is altered, it changes the characteristic feature of 
that    compound.    Compounds    are    always    uniform    and 
homogenous in nature. 
Mixture:  
 A mixture  is  an  impure  substance,  containing  two  or 
more   elements   or   substances   that   are   not   chemically 
combined.  The  elements  in  the  mixture  are  not  present  in  a 
fixed ratio and vary according to the mixture. The components 
in  a  mixture  are  combined  physically  without  altering  their 
properties.  They  do  not  undergo  any  chemical  change  and 
retain  their  individual  properties.  The  mixture  can  either  be 
homogenous   or   heterogenous.   Examples   of   Mixtures   are 
smog, cement, soil, blood, brass, sea water, bleach etc. 
 The  components  in  the  mixture  can  be  separated  by 
physical   methods   like   purification,   distillation,   filtration, 
centrifugation, electrophoresis or chromatography methods. 
 The  components  in  a  mixture  can  be  separated  based  on 
the  properties  like  solubility,  boiling  point,  melting  point, 
density  etc.  For  example,  a  mixture  of  water  and  alcohol  can 
be separated based on the difference in their boiling point. 
Physical properties of substances 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 32 
 
 A physical property of a substance describes the physical 
nature of the atoms, elements and compounds. All substances 
present in nature have different physical properties, which can 
be used to separate them from a mixture. Some of the physical 
properties  are  appearance,  size,  texture,  solubility,  melting 
point, boiling point and density. 
 The  different  components  in  a  mixture  can  be  separated 
based upon the following properties. 
1. The original physical and chemical properties of individual 
substances in a mixture do not undergo any change. 
2.  The  individual  components  in  a  mixture  do  not  share  any 
chemical bonding.  
3.  The  individual  components  in  a  mixture  are  dissolved  in 
various proportions. 
4.  The  substances  in  a  mixture  exist  together  inspite  of  the 
absence of any force between them. 
5. The  substances  in  a  mixture  are  either  homogenous  or 
heterogenous in nature. 
6.  The  property  of  the  mixture  depends  on  the  properties  of 
individual components. 
7. The substances in the mixture can be separated by physical 
methods. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 33 
 
 Based  on  the  particle  size  of  the  individual  components, 
mixture can be classified into solution, colloid and suspension 
(fig 2). 
 
Fig. 2 Types of solution 
Solution 
 A  solution  is  a  uniform  homogenous  mixture  of  tiny 
particles  with  a  size  of  less  than  a  nanometer  that  remains 
same throughout. The particles in a solution are not visible to 
the  naked  eye  and  cannot  be  separated  easily  with  physical 
methods. Examples are a mixture of salt or sugar in water. 
Colloids 
 A  colloid  is  a  mixture  of  particles  that  range  between  1 
nanometer  and  1  micrometer  and  are  dispersed  in  a  solvent 
and  are  separated  by  centrifugation.  Examples  are  aerosol, 
sols, emulsion, gel. 
Suspension 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 34 
 
 A suspension is a heterogenous mixture of solid particles 
larger  than  1000  nanometers  spread  throughout  the  liquid 
without dissolving in it. The particles in the suspension settles 
down  on  standing  and  can  be  separated  by  filtration  or 
centrifugation.  Examples  are  muddy  water,  sand  particles  in 
water. 
Separation techniques 
 Separation  techniques  are  methods  used  to  separate  one 
component  from  another  in  a  mixture.  Separation  is  a  very 
important  step  in  the  purification  process.  The  differences  in 
the  physical  or  chemical  properties  of  the  substances  in  a 
mixture are used as a basis of separation. The properties may 
include  size,  shape,  mass,  density,  boiling  or  melting  points 
etc.   The   purification   of   a   compound   depends   upon   the 
different separation techniques employed. 
 The  separation  of  substances  can  be  on  a  small  scale  or 
on  a  large  scale.  The  small  scale  techniques are  used  in  the 
laboratories  or  research  labs  for  analytical  purposes.  Large 
scale  separation  techniques  are  used  in  the  industry  for  large 
scale preparative purposes. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 35 
 
 The separation techniques include filtration, evaporation, 
distillation, crystallization, sublimation, dialysis, 
centrifugation, chromatography and electrophoresis. 
 Preliminary  separation  techniques  used  for  separating 
components   in   the   mixture   for   preparative   or   analytical 
techniques include the following methods (fig 3): 
Methods of separation of dry substances 
 1.  Handpicking is  the  method  by  which  the  impure 
unwanted  substances are  separated  from  useful  substances  by 
hand. For example, we separate the impurities such as stones, 
husks   and   other   unwanted   substances   from   grains   by 
handpicking. 
 2.  Threshing is  the  method  used  to  separate  the  grains 
from  the  dried  husk  by  beating  during  harvesting.  This  is  the 
process  used  by  farmers  for  separating  the  grains  from  dried 
stalks by threshing by hand, animals or machine. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 36 
 
 
Fig. 3 Separation of substances 
 3.  Winnowing is  the  method  where  light  weightless 
components  are  separated  from  the  heavy  components  with 
the  help  of  wind  or  blowing.  This  is  also  a  method  used  by 
farmers to separate the husk and chaff from grains. 
 4.  Sieving is  the  method  by which  particles  of  different 
sizes  are  separated  by  passing  through  a  sieve  with  different 
mesh  size.  By  this  method,  the  smaller  particles  are  passed 
through the pores while the larger particles are retained by the 
sieve. 
 5.   Magnetic   separation is   the   method   by   which   a 
substance  can  be  separated  based  on  its  magnetic  property. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 37 
 
Strong magnets are used to separate magnetic substances like 
iron, nickel, steel, oxides and cobalt from impure substances. 
Methods of separation of wet substances 
1. Evaporation  
 
Fig. 4 Evaporation  
 Evaporation is the method by which a solute is separated 
from a solution by evaporating the solvent. Water is converted 
into  water  vapor  by  sunlight  or  heating  to  its  boiling  point. 
Salt is separated from seawater by evaporation (fig 4).  
2. Filtration  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 38 
 
 
Fig. 5 Filtration 
 Filtration is  the  method  by  which  insoluble  solid  is 
separated  from  liquid  by  filtration  using  filter  paper.  The 
insoluble  solid will  not  pass through  the filter  paper allowing 
the liquid to be separated in a pure form (fig 5). 
3. Sedimentation  
 
Fig. 6 Sedimentation 
 Sedimentation is  the  method  by  which  solid  insoluble 
particles  are  separated  from  liquid  by  allowing  it  to  settle  at 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 39 
 
the  bottom. This  is  followed  by  decantation  where  the  clear 
liquid  is  separated  from  the  solids  without  disturbing  the 
solids settled at the bottom (fig 6). 
4. Distillation  
 
 
Fig. 7 Distillation 
Distillation  is  a  method  by  which  two  or  more  liquids  are 
separated  based  on  the  boiling  point  where  one  liquid  is 
vaporized, condensed and separated. The solution is heated to 
boiling,  and  the  pure  vapors  are  condensed  by  allowing  it  to 
pass through the condenser (fig 7). 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 40 
 
5. Sublimation  
 
Fig. 8 Sublimation 
 Sublimation  is  the  method  by  which  volatile  substances 
are  separated  from  non-volatile  substances.  This  is  a  method 
which  converts  the  solid  directly  to  vapor  state.  Substances 
like    camphor,    naphthalene,    anthracene    and    ammonium 
chloride are sublime substances (fig 8). 
6. Crystallization  
 Crystallization is  the  method  that  is  used  to  separate 
solids   from   a  solution   by  forming   pure  crystals.   Salt  is 
separated from seawater by crystallization (fig 9).  
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 41 
 
 
Fig. 9 Crystallization 
7. Separation funnel  
 
Fig. 10 Separation funnel 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 42 
 
 Separation  funnel  is  the  method  by  which  a  separating 
funnel is  used  to  separate  two  liquids  which  do  not  mix  with 
each other (fig 10). 
What  is  the  difference  between  Separation  and  Isolation 
techniques? 
 Separation  is  an  important  method  to  separate  or  purify 
one compound from another; whereas isolation is a technique 
used  to  separate  or  purify  a  compound  from  its  original 
source. 
Why do we have to separate compounds? 
1. To separate a compound in a pure form. 
2. To  remove  unwanted  substances  from  the  compound  of 
interest. 
3. To identify the nature of the compound that is separated. 
4. To   analyze   the   physical,   chemical   and   biological 
properties of the compound. 
5. The  isolated  compounds  can  be  converted  into  pills  or 
formulations that can be taken as medicine. 
6. Isolation  of  phytochemicals  are  necessary  for  current 
research in medicine 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 43 
 
Extraction 
 Extraction  is  a  method  of  separation  technique  that  is 
involved in the separation of biologically active compounds in 
a pure form from a plant or animal tissue using solvents. The 
solvent   dissolves   the   compounds   present   in   the   source, 
depending  upon  the  solubility  of  the  compound.  The  solvent 
penetrates  into  the  source  and  helps  in  the  softening  of  the 
tissues,  bringing  the  active  compounds  into  solution  (fig  11). 
 
Fig. 11 Extraction of bioactive compounds from plants  
Preliminary pre-extraction steps  
 The first step in the extraction procedure is to identify the 
source  of  the  compound  to  be  isolated,  whether  it  is  a  plant 
source or animal source. The availability and the origin of the 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 44 
 
source have to be studied either from the literature or from the 
natural source. 
 Whole  plants  can  be  used  as  a  source  or  the  individual 
parts  of  the  plants  like  leaves,  stem,  bark,  root,  flowers  or 
fruits  can  be  used  as  plant  source.  The  different  organs  of  an 
animal like brain, liver, pancreas or kidneys can be used as an 
animal source to isolate organelles or organic compounds like 
nucleus,   mitochondria,   ribosomes,   endoplasmic   reticulum, 
DNA,  RNA,  proteins  etc.  Let  us  study  about  the  separation 
and isolation of plant materials.  
Selection and collection of plants 
 Plants    contain    many    bioactive    compounds    called 
phytochemicals  like  phenols,  flavonoids,  alkaloids,  tannins, 
steroids,  glycosides,  oils  that  are  present  in  various  parts  of 
the  plants  such  as  leaf,  stem,  root,  seed,  fruit  or  flower.  The 
bioactive  compounds  can  be  isolated  from  the  source  by  the 
following    conventional    and    non-conventional    (modern) 
methods (fig 12).  
Conventional methods  
 Conventional methods of extraction include methods like 
maceration,   percolation   and   decoction,   in   which   a   large 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 45 
 
amount of solvents are used with or without temperature for a 
long period of time. 
Non-conventional methods 
 Non-conventional methods of extraction include methods 
like    ultrasound    assisted    extraction,    microwave    assisted 
extraction, supercritical fluid extraction, pulse field extraction, 
enzyme assisted extraction methods and so on. 
 
Fig.    12    Conventional    and    non-conventional    extraction 
methods 
Maceration (softening by liquid) 
 Maceration  is  a  popular  and  simple  technique  used  for 
the  extraction  of  essential  oils  and  active  compounds  from 
plant  materials.  The  plant  material  is  coarsely  ground  to 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 46 
 
increase the surface area and dissolved in a solvent in a closed 
vessel.  The  soaking  of  the  plant  material  in  a  solvent  for 
several hours leads to the softening of the material (fig 13).  
 
Fig.   13   Extraction   methods – decoction,   infusion   and 
maceration 
 Maceration   ruptures   the   leaf   structure,   exposing   the 
chemical constituents of the cells like polyphenols, lipids and 
amino  acids.  The  connective  tissue  fibers  are dissolved  to 
release  the  bioactive  components.  Maceration  is  the  process 
used in wine making where the phenolic materials like tannins 
and  anthocyanins  are  leached  from  the  grapes.  This  is  a  very 
old  technique  which  requires  long  extraction  time  and  large 
amount  of  solvent  and  low  extraction  efficiency  as  it  is  done 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 47 
 
in  cold  condition.  This  method  can  be  favorable  for  the 
extraction of thermo labile substances.   
Percolation (to penetrate) 
 
Fig. 14 Percolation technique 
 Percolation is the downward movement of water through 
soil  due  to  gravity  and  capillary  forces.  Percolation  is  a 
conventional  method  for  the  extraction  of  phytochemicals 
from  plants  using  solvents.  The  plant  material  is  placed  in  a 
tank  with  excess  of  solvent  for  several  hours.  The  solvent 
percolates   into   the   plant   material,   leaching   the   bioactive 
compounds    into    the    solvent.    The    solvent    (called    as 
menstruum)   is   further   collected   by   filtration   and   the 
compounds   separated   from   the   solvent   by   distillation   or 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 48 
 
evaporation.   Percolation   method   is   more   efficient   than 
maceration  as  it  uses  fresh  solvent  to  replace  the  saturated 
solvent.  
Decoction (to boil down) 
 Decoction  is  also  a  conventional  method  of  extraction 
used  from  olden  days  to  extract  the  plant  material  by  boiling 
in  a  suitable  solvent  especially  water  (fig  13).  This  is  a 
common   method   of   preparation   of   home-made   herbal 
medicine,  mostly  followed  in  India  and  China.  The  plant 
material  is  dried  and  cut  into  small  pieces  and  stored  in  air 
tight  containers  for  medicinal  use.  The  preparation  of coffee 
or  tea  decoction  is  a  very  good  example.  Decoction  is  the 
resultant   liquid   obtained   after   boiling   the   plant   material. 
Water  is  generally  used  as  a  solvent,  but  sometimes  aqueous 
solvents  with  ethanol  will  also  be  used.  The  plant  material  is 
boiled  with the solvent  to  extract  the  bioactive compound  for 
a  few  hours  to  reduce  the  solvent  and  to  concentrate  the 
extract  in  the  form  of  Kashayam,  used  in  traditional  herbal 
medicine.  This  method  is  not  suitable  of  extracting  thermo 
labile  substances.  Water  decoctions  should  be  prepared  fresh 
and consumed immediately. Alcohol decoctions can be stored 
for some time and used as tincture.  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 49 
 
Reflux extraction 
 
Fig. 15 Reflux extraction 
 Reflux  extraction  is  another  method  of  extraction  that  is 
more  efficient  than percolation  and  maceration.  This  method 
uses heat and requires less time and solvent than the previous 
methods.  This method  is  used  for  the  isolation and extraction 
of  thermostable  compounds.  However,  this  method  is  not 
useful for the extraction of thermolabile compounds. Solvents 
like  alcohol  and  other  organic  solvents  can  be  used.  Alcohol 
can be used in combination with aqueous solvents like water. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 50 
 
This reflux extraction method gives a better yield of separated 
compounds than percolation and maceration methods (fig 15).  
Soxhlet extraction 
 
Fig. 16 Soxhlet extraction 
 Soxhlet   extraction   is   a   very   efficient   method   when 
compared  to  percolation  and  maceration.  This  method  is  a 
combination  of  reflux  extraction  and  percolation  and  utilizes 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 51 
 
fresh  solvent.  The  extraction  is  done  by  heating  the  solvent 
and    the    compound    is    extracted    by    evaporation    and 
condensation  of  the  solvent  and  requires  less  time.  The  hot 
solvent  is  allowed  to  flow  through  the  crude  material  several 
times  to  ensure  the  complete  extraction  of  the  bioactive 
compound  in  the  solvent.  The  solvent  can  be  recovered  by 
distillation and the bioactive compound by evaporation.    
➢ The soxhlet apparatus contains the following 
components: 
➢ A round bottom flask containing the solvent 
➢ Extraction  chamber  with thistle  that  contains  the  crude 
sample 
➢ Heating mantle 
➢ Condensor 
 The  crude  sample  in  the  powdered  form  is  placed  in  a 
filter  paper  or  gauze  cloth  and  packed  inside  the  thistle.  The 
solvent  is  kept  in  the  round  bottom  flask  for  boiling  in  the 
heating   mantle.   The   vapour   of   the   solvent   enters   the 
condenser  via  a  side  tube.  The  vapour  is  condensed  and  falls 
on  the  sample  inside  and  fills  the  thistle  covering  the  sample 
kept in the cloth. The solvent percolates the crude sample and 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 52 
 
the bioactive compound gets extracted in the solvent and falls 
back into the round bottom flask (fig 16).  
 The  process  is  repeated  for  several  cycles  until  the 
compound  is  completely  extracted  and  the  solvent  becomes 
colourless.   The   extracted   solvent   is   further   removed   by 
distillation and   the   bioactive   compound   is   isolated   by 
evaporation and drying or lyophilization. This method is only 
suited  for  the  isolation  of  thermostable  substances,  but  not 
suitable  for  thermolabile  substances  as  extraction  requires 
temperature.  The  solvent  used should  be  pure  and  have  a 
constant boiling point. 
 Nowadays,  modern  extraction  methods  like  supercritical 
fluid  extraction  (SFC),  pressurized  liquid  extraction  (PLE), 
microwave   assisted   extraction   (MAE)   are   used   for   the 
extraction  of  natural  products.  These  modern  methods  are 
more advantageous than the previous methods as they require 
less solvent, shorter extraction time and high selectivity. 
Pressurized liquid extraction (PLE) 
 This  method  is  otherwise  called  as  accelerated  solvent 
extraction  or  enhanced solvent  extraction  method.  This  is  a 
high  pressure  solvent  extraction  method,  which  applies  high 
pressure  to  keep  the  solvent  in  the  liquid  state  above  the 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 53 
 
boiling  point.  This  results  in  high  solubility  and  penetration 
into the matrix of the plant.  
 This method  is  suitable  for  the  diffusion  and  extraction 
of  lipids  into  the  solvent.  This  method  requires  less  time  and 
gives  high  reproducibility.  Many  types  of  natural  compounds 
like  saponin,  flavonoid  and  essential  oils.  Due  to  the  use  of 
high temperature, this method is not suitable for the extraction 
of themolabile compounds. 
Supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) 
 In  this  method,  supercritical  liquids  and  gases  such  as 
carbon  dioxide,  nitrogen,  methane,  ethane,  ethylene,  nitrous 
oxide, sulfur dioxide, propane, propylene, ammonia and sulfur 
hexafluoride are used for the isolation of bioactive ingredients 
from natural sources. The plant material is extracted with gas 
instead  of  solvent  under  controlled  temperature  and  pressure. 
The  active  compounds  are  dissolved  in  the  gas  at  reduced 
temperature and pressure and will be transferred as a mass in 
the supercritical solvent (fig 17).  
 
Fig. 17 Supercritical fluid extraction 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 54 
 
 However,  pressure  has  a  greater  influence  on  the  mass 
transfer   of   active   compounds   than   temperature.   As   the 
pressure increases, more amounts of active ingredients will be 
transferred  into  the  supercritical  fluid.  A  wide  variety  of 
natural   compounds   can   be   separated   by   this   method. 
Supercritical carbon dioxide (S-CO
2
) is widely used to extract 
thermally  labile  compounds  because  of  its  low  cost,  non-
toxicity  and  selectivity.  The  S-CO
2
 is  ideal  for  the  extraction 
of thermally labile compounds because of its low polarity. 
Ultrasound assisted extraction (UAE) 
 
Fig. 18 Ultasound assisted extraction 
 This  is  a  very  advanced  method  of  plant  extraction 
otherwise  called  as  ultrasonic  extraction  or  sonication.  This 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 55 
 
method  used  ultrasonic  waves  for  the  extraction  of  large 
amounts  of  bioactive  compounds  within  a  short  period  of 
time.  The  solvent  penetrates  into  the  plant  matrix  due  to  the 
disruption  of  cell  walls  due  to  the  ultrasound  energy.  The 
extraction  can  be  achieved  at  low  temperatures  and  uses  less 
solvent  for  the  separation  of  thermally  unstable  compounds 
also (fig 18). 
 
Microwave assisted extraction (MAE) 
 
Fig.19 Microwave assisted extraction  
 This  method  uses  microwave  energy  to  separate  the 
active ingredients from the plant source. Microwave possesses 
both electric and magnetic field that are perpendicular to each 
other.  The  electric  field  generates  heat  by  interacting  with 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 56 
 
polar compounds by rotation and ionic conduction, so that the 
sample  heats  up  simultaneously  and  extracts  the  bioactive 
compound. Heat disrupts the weak hydrogen bonds due to the 
dipole  rotation  of  molecules  and  the  migration  of dissolved 
molecules  increases  the  penetration  of  solvent  into  the  plant 
matrix  and  extracts  the  active  ingredients  into  the  solvent. 
This  method  increases  the  extraction  yield  by  preventing  the 
thermal  degradation  of  compounds  (fig  19).  There  are  two 
types  of  extraction  methods – solvent  free  extraction  for 
volatile  compounds  and  solvent  extraction  for  non-volatile 
compounds.  
Pulsed electric field extraction 
 Pulse  electric  field  extraction  is  a  non-thermal  method 
and  suitable  for  the  extraction  of thermolabile  compounds. 
This   method   of   separation   takes   place   in   the   field   of 
electricity;  it  increases  the  yield  and  decreases  the  extraction 
time.  The  extraction  depends  on  the  field  strength,  energy 
input, pulse number and temperature. 
Enzyme assisted extraction 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 57 
 
 
Fig. 20 Enzyme assisted extraction 
 This  method  uses  the  hydrolytic  action  of  enzymes  on 
the   cell   wall,   cell   membrane   to   release   the   bioactive 
compounds from the plants. Cellulose, α-amylase,  pectinase, 
glucose  oxidase are  the enzymes  commonly employed in this 
process.  Enzymes  enhance  the  extraction  efficiency  of  the 
compound.   This   method   overcomes   the   denaturation   of 
bioactive compounds when high temperatures are used.  
Hydro distillation and steam distillation 
 The  hydro  distillation  and  steam distillation  method  is 
used  for  the  extraction  of  volatile  oil. Hydro  distillation  is  a 
better  for  the  extraction  of  primary  and  secondary  essential 
oils   than   steam   distillation.   But   this   method   has   some 
disadvantage,   where   the   yield   of   extraction   is   less with 
increased   time.   Molecular   distillation   method   is   a   more 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 58 
 
advanced technique  where  the molecules can  be  separated  by 
distillation  under  vacuum  at  a  temperature  below  the  boiling 
point. Thermosensitive and high molecular weight compounds 
are separated by this method. 
Chemistry of working with hazardous materials  
 Many  laboratories  are  required  in  the  schools,  colleges, 
scientific  and  research  institutions.  These  laboratories  use 
many  different  kinds  of  chemicals  involving  acids,  bases, 
corrosive, toxic chemicals. Certain other laboratories also use 
many  explosive  and  radioactive  materials  for  their  research 
purposes.  The  importance  of  safety  and  preventive  measures 
has to be emphasized and followed in all these laboratories for 
the safety of people handling the chemicals. According to the 
Occupational   Safety   and   Health   Act   in   1970,   certain 
precautions  have  to  be  followed  to  protect  the  safety  and 
health of employees, teachers, students or researchers. 
 Though  the  safety  measures  have  been  followed  strictly 
in  industries,  it  has  been  adopted  very  slowly  in  educational 
institutions. Science programs involving teaching and practice 
are  followed  in  all  educational  institutions  as  a  part  of  the 
academics.   These   science   programs   have   some   potential 
dangers  during  the  use  of  chemicals  and  laboratory  reagents. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 59 
 
Most  dangers  can  be  avoided  by  following  safety  measures 
and good laboratory practices. 
 Safety   and   health   should   be   an   important   part   of 
planning,  implementation  and  practice  of  science  program, 
wherever  it may  be.  Each  person  involved  in  the  program 
should  have  an  obligation  and  responsibility  in  following  the 
safety  measures.  Teachers  and  instructors  play  an  important 
role  in  imparting  and  instructing  the  students  about  safety 
measures to be followed in a laboratory. Each and every stage 
of  the  laboratory  experiment  should  be  planned,  instructed 
and  supervised  carefully.  When  proper  instructions  are  given 
by  the  instructors  before  the  experiment,  the  students  can 
develop the habit of assessing the risk and dangers associated 
with  working  with  chemicals,  toxic,  poisonous  or  hazardous 
materials. 
 Everyone working in the laboratory should wear personal 
protection   equipments   (PPE)   like   gloves,   coat,   mask   to 
demonstrate   safety   behavior   and   promote   the   culture   of 
practicing safety. 
 The  following  aspects  should  be  monitored  periodically 
to avoid any risk in the laboratory: 
Instruments and Equipments in the laboratory 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 60 
 
➢ The instruments and equipments in the laboratory should 
be  checked  regularly  to  ensure  its  proper  usage  and  to 
check any defect in the working. 
➢ Proper quality check should be conducted and the date of 
quality  check  should  be  recorded  with  signatures  of 
authorities. 
➢ The   instruments   and   equipments   should   be   properly 
labeled  to  identify  the  instrument.  Also,  if  there  are  any 
hazardous    or    defective    instruments,    it    should    be 
mentioned  and  labeled.  Care  should  be  taken  not  to  use 
any defective instruments. 
➢ Records   should   be   maintained   for   the   usage   of   the 
instruments; laboratory training of staff and students also 
should be recorded.  
➢ Educate  students  on  the  location  and  proper  usage  of 
instruments and equipments. 
➢ Emergency  safety  equipments,  first  aid  kits  and  fire 
extinguishers should be available for the proper usage of 
the people working in the laboratory. 
➢ If  there  are  any  unwanted  incidents  or  hazard,  it  should 
be  immediately  reported  to  the  concerned  person;  and  if 
there   is   an   emergency   situation   it   should   be   taken 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 61 
 
seriously  and  call  the  attention  of  the  police  or  hospital. 
The unwanted incident can be fire, chemical spill, leak of 
toxic or hazardous chemicals, explosion etc. 
Chemicals 
➢ Proper  labeling  of  all  the  chemicals  should  be  done  and 
entered in the stock register. Chemicals should be stored 
in  locked  cupboards  and  the  usage  should  be  recorded. 
The  toxic  and  hazardous  chemicals  should  be  separated 
from   the   normal   chemicals   and   should   be   labeled 
properly.   The   acids   should   be   kept   in   fumigation 
chamber with proper ventilation. 
➢ Stock   register   and   log   books   should   be   maintained 
properly and the students should be instructed to make a 
note on the usage of chemicals and instruments. 
➢ The  used  chemicals  and  reagents  should  be  disposed 
properly  without  causing  any  danger  or  damage  to  the 
people or property. 
➢ Ensure that all safety rules are practiced by students and 
researchers   at   all   times.   Avoid   eating,   drinking   and 
smoking  inside  the  laboratory.  Never  allow  anyone  to 
take the chemicals out of the laboratory. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 62 
 
➢ Protective  gloves  should  be  worn  at  all  times  when 
handling the chemicals. 
➢ The  reagents  prepared  from the  chemicals  should  be 
labeled  with  name,  concentration  and  date  and  initial  of 
the person who prepared. 
➢ Spatula, spoon, pipettes, measuring cylinder and burettes 
should be used for the transfer of chemicals and reagents. 
➢  Flammable  liquids  and  chemicals should  not  be  heated 
directly, use a hot water bath for heating. 
➢ Never  add  water  directly  to  acid,  instead  acid  should  be 
slowly added into water little by little. 
➢ The  chemicals  should  never  be  touched,  smelled,  tasted 
or inhaled. 
➢ Chemicals  and  reagents  should  be  placed  in  a  tray, 
bucket or appropriate containers during transport. 
According  to  the  periodic  table,  there  are  112  elements 
present,  and  are  arranged  according  to  the  atomic  number 
horizontally.  The  horizontal  rows  are  called periods. The 
vertical rows are called groups or families. Elements within 
a specific group have the same chemical properties as they 
have  the  same  number  of  electrons  in  the  outer  most  shell. 
The  groups  are  divided  into  three  categories:  metals,  non-

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 63 
 
metals  and  metalloids.  The elements  lower  in  the  periodic 
table  are  solids  and  those  elements  higher  in  the  table  are 
gases. 
There  are  four  significant  hazardous groups  or  families 
that  have  similar  chemical  features  that  are  very  reactive. 
They can be classified as follows: 
1. Group I – Alkali metals 
2. Group II – Alkaline earths 
3. Group VII – Halogens 
4. Group VIII – Noble gases 
Group I – The alkali metals 
The   alkali   metals   include   lithium,   sodium,   potassium, 
rubidium,  cesium  and  francium.  These  elements  are  highly 
reactive. When they come in contact with water, they produce 
flammable   hydrogen   gas   and   enough   heat   to   ignite   the 
hydrogen. Sodium and potassium are the most common alkali 
metals that are water-reactive (fig 21). 
  
 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  21  Group  I  Alkali  metals  (Lithium,  Sodium, Potassium, 
Rubidium, Caesium, Francium) 
 These   metals   are   usually   stored   under   kerosene   or 
vacuum to prevent the exposure to air and water. Sodium and 
potassium combine with free oxygen and hydrogen atoms and 
forms  sodium  hydroxide  (NaOH)  and  potassium  hydroxide 
(KOH),   which   are   both   very   corrosive.   The   reaction   of 
sodium and potassium metals with water are very violent and 
generates  enough  heat  to  melt  the  metal,  ignite  the  hydrogen 
gas  and  any  other  combustible  near  them.  The  fire  caused  by 
sodium   and   potassium   should   be   put   off   with   special 
extinguishing agents. 
Group II – The Alkaline Earths 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 65 
 
  
Fig. 22 Group II Alkaline earth 
 The   alkaline   metals   include   beryllium,   magnesium 
calcium,  strontium,  barium  and  radium  and  are  also  water-
reactive,  but  lesser  than  alkali  metals  (fig  22).  Magnesium 
powder,  dust,  chips  and  shavings  are  more  dangerous  than 
solid  magnesium,  which  can  explode  on  contact  with  water. 
Magnesium  burns  very  intensely  with  a  bright  white  flame 
and  cause  retinal  damage  on  staring.  Water  intensifies  the 
flame  as  it  is  broken  down  to  an  oxidizer  (oxygen)  and  fuel 
(hydrogen); and hence water extinguishers should not be used 
to put out the fire. Water molecules can be instantly converted 
to steam by the heat of the fire, resulting in steam explosion.  
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 66 
 
Group  VII – The  Halogens
 
Fig. 23 Halogens 
 The  halogens  include  fluorine,  chlorine,  bromine,  iodine 
and  astatine.  Though  these  elements  are  non-flammable,  they 
are  highly  reactive  and  toxic  (fig  23).  Chlorine  is  the  most 
common  halogen  and  has  a  strong  odor.  Chlorine  reacts  with 
moisture  in the respiratory  system  and  skin  to  form  corrosive 
hydrochloric   acid   (HCl)   and   hypochlorous   acid   (HOCl), 
which  is  very  toxic.  Fluorine  reacts  with  water  to  form 
hydrofluoric acid (HF) and hydrofluorous acid, which is more 
corrosive than chlorine. Both are very powerful oxidizers that 
can  burn  without  the  presence  of  oxygen.  People  handling 
these halogens should wear chemically protective clothing. 
Group VIII – The Noble gases 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 67 
 
  
Fig.  24  Group  VIII  Noble  gases  (Helium,  Neon,  Argon, 
Krypton, Xenon, Radon) 
 The  Nobel gases  include  helium,  neon,  argon,  krypton, 
xenon  and  radon  and  are  called  as  inert  gases  (fig  24).  The 
inert gases are not toxic or flammable and will not react with 
other   metals;   but   when   these   gases   are   released   in   an 
uncontrollable manner, the gas expands to fill the entire space, 
whether  it  is  a  room  or  a  closed  space  and  will  displace  the 
oxygen    from    the    environment    leading    to    decreased 
availability  of  oxygen  and  asphyxiation.  These  noble  gases 
are  transported  as  cryogenic  liquid  (-130 ͦ F)  that  can cause 
severe damage to people and property. 
Reactions of chemicals 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 68 
 
 When   two   or   more   chemicals   are   mixed,   or   when 
chemicals are  exposed  to  heat,  fire,  water  or  air; it will result 
in  some  kind  of  reactions.  Some  of  the  reactions  are  safe, 
while  others  are hazardous  and  lead  to  some  unexpected  or 
unwanted   reactions   viz.   industrial   fire,   combustion   of 
flammable chemicals.  Reactions   can   be   classified   into 
exothermic   and   endothermic   reactions.   When   a   chemical 
reaction releases a lot of energy in the form of heat, light and 
sound,  it  is  called exothermic  reactions. When  a  chemical 
reaction  uses  energy  from  an  external  source,  it  is  called 
endothermic reactions (fig 25). 
 
Fig.25 Exothermic and Endothermic reactions 
 During an exothermic reaction, large amount of energy is 
released;  it  can  be  very  dangerous  and  leads  to  an  explosion 
with  heat  and  fire,  causing  severe  damage  to  people  and 
property.  These chemicals  may become  hazardous when  they 
react  with  one  another  than  when  it  is  not  mixed.  A  reactive 
material  can  undergo  chemical  reaction  only  under  certain 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 69 
 
conditions.  The  presence  of  air,  water  and  even  some  normal 
conditions   can   trigger   the   conversion   of   chemicals   to 
hazardous  or  toxic  or  explosive  ones.  Reactive  materials  can 
be shock-sensitive, friction-sensitive, pyrophoric or 
hypergolic.  
 Water reactive materials react with water; the severity of 
the  reaction  depends  on  the  metal  that  reacts  with  water.  A 
water  reactive  material  is  defined  by  the  type  of  gas  it  gives 
like – toxic,  corrosive  or  inflammable. Let  us  learn  some  of 
the reactions below: 
Oxidation and combustion 
 In  an  oxidation-reduction  reaction  or  redox  reaction, 
electron is transferred from one atom, compound or molecule 
to   another.  Loss  or   gain   of  electrons   takes  place  in  all 
oxidation reduction reaction. The substance that loses electron 
is called a reducing agent (reducer). The substance that gains 
electron  is  called  an oxidizing  agent (oxidizer).  Substances 
that either give up or gain electrons easily are called as strong 
reducing  or  oxidizing  agents.  Halogens  are  strong  oxidizers, 
as  they  have  seven  electrons  in  the  outer  shell  and  needs  one 
electron  to  fill  it.  As  it  requires  only  one  electron  to  fill  the 
outermost   shell,   halogens   are   very   reactive   compared   to 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 70 
 
oxygen  which  needs  two  electrons  to  fill  the  outermost  shell. 
After  the  oxidation-reduction  reaction,  the  oxidizing  agent  is 
reduced and the reducing agent is oxidized. 
Why oxidation-reduction reactions can become 
hazardous? 
 Oxidation  is  the  chemical  combination  of  an  oxidizer 
(oxygen) with other substances. Oxidation-reduction potential 
is  measure  by  how  quick  a  material  can  give  out  its  oxygen 
atom  to  react  with  other  substance.  The  more  readily  a 
material  gives  out  oxygen  or  any  other  oxidizer;  it  is  more 
readily  combustible and  hazardous.  The  chemical  reaction 
involving  an  oxidizer  can  be  slow  or  fast  depending  on  the 
chemical it reacts with. 
Polymerization 
 Chemical  reactions  in  which  small  compounds  called 
monomers react  with  one  another  to  form  a  large  compound 
called  polymers  is  known  as polymerization.  Or  in  other 
words, polymers are repeating units of monomers. 
Laboratory Hazards  
 Hazards in the laboratory can be classified into chemical 
hazards, electrical hazards, fire hazards and biohazards 
Chemical hazards 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 71 
 
 The  chemicals  stored  in  the  laboratory  can  pose  danger 
to  the  people  working  in  the  laboratory.  They  can  be  toxic, 
poisonous, corrosive, flammable and explosives. 
 It  is  the  responsibility  of  everyone  who  is  working  or 
handling   chemicals   in   the   laboratory   to   conduct   all   the 
experiments  in  a  safe  manner  to  protect  the  people  and 
environment.   Some   kind   of   safety   measures   have   to   be 
identified   and   adopted   by   all   to   prevent   any   unwanted 
incidents. 
Understanding the chemical hazards 
 There  are  many  harmful  toxic  hazardous  chemicals  or 
chemical  products  in  the  laboratory  to  which  people  are 
exposed when working in the laboratory. These materials can 
be  very  dangerous  and  create  physically  or  health  hazards. 
Physical  hazards  can  be  caused by  fire  or  explosives that  can 
lead to burns, rashes or even death. Chemical hazards can lead 
to toxicity or serious health hazards like cancer, heart disease 
or  can  damage  the  internal  organs  like  liver,  kidney,  lungs. 
Though  chemicals  are  available  everywhere  in  many  forms, 
the  proper  usage  of chemicals,  preventive  measures,  usage  of 
personal protective equipments and correct way of disposal of 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 72 
 
chemicals  and  hazardous  materials  will  prevent  any  kind  of 
mishappening. 
Chemicals can be classified as hazardous when it is capable of 
producing adverse effects on humans or the environment. It is 
very  much  important  to  know  the  chemicals  and  its  harmful 
effects  before  working  with  it  and  follow  all  precautionary 
measures when handling the chemicals. 
Physical hazards of chemicals 
 The   chemicals   that   pose   physical   hazards   can   be 
unstable,  oxidative,  water  reactive,  compressed,  flammable, 
combustible, explosive etc.  
Flammable or combustible chemicals 
 The chemical that are capable of combustion or that has a 
tendency   to   explode   is   called   flammable   or combustible 
chemicals.   They   evaporate   quickly   and   produce   vapours 
which  can  easily  get  ignited.  The  flammable  substances  can 
be  a  solid,  liquid  or  gas,  but  mostly  it  is  a  flammable  liquid 
available    in    the    chemical    laboratory.    The    flammable 
chemicals  can  be  classified  based  on  the  flash  point,  boiling 
point and ignition temperature. 
 Flash  point  (FP) is  the  lowest  temperature  at  which  the 
flammable liquid gives off sufficient vapor to ignite. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 73 
 
 Boiling point (BP) is the temperature at which the vapor 
pressure  of  the  liquid  is  equal  to  the  atmospheric  pressure 
under  which  the  liquid  vaporizes.  Liquids  with  low  boiling 
point are highly flammable. 
 Ignition  temperature  (IT) is  the  lowest  temperature  at 
which a chemical will ignite and burn. The lower the ignition 
temperature, the faster it will get inflamed. 
 These  flammable  or  combustible  chemicals  can  react 
with  oxidizers  and  can  cause  a  fire  or  explosion  resulting  in 
cloudy  vapors.  The  flammable  and  combustible  chemicals 
should have the label of hazard and all the details of the flash 
point, boiling point and ignition temperature mentioned. Some 
flammable  chemicals  can  also  be  toxic  and  can  cause  serious 
hazards  to  the  lungs  if  inhaled.  The  flammable  liquids  that 
have  a  flash  point  below  the  room  temperature  pose  severe 
danger.  Eg.  Organic  solvents  like  ether,  alcohol,  Gasoline, 
acetone,  benzene,  acetaldehyde,  heptanes,  hexane  etc.  are 
highly flammable.  Certain  other  chemicals  can  turn  toxic 
when they come in contact with other substances or when it is 
converted to another substance. Eg. Chloroform which is non-
flammable  can  become  flammable  when  exposed  to  heat  or 
flame  and  can  produce  carbon  monoxide,  chlorine,  phosgene 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 74 
 
which is highly toxic.  Care  should  be  taken  while  handling 
volatile and flammable substances; it should always be kept in 
a  secluded  place  with  good  ventilation  away  from  other 
chemicals  and  used  inside  a  fume  hood.  Certain  flames  are 
invisible to the naked eye, which is difficult to trace and when 
it comes in contact with an ignition source, can catch fire. The 
best  way  to  prevent  a  fire  is  to  avoid  any  ignition  source, 
reduce oxygen supply and avoid leakage. 
Oxidizers 
 Oxidizers  are  compounds  that  lead  to  the  oxidation  of  a 
compound; it is an electronegative atom (acceptor) which can 
accept  electrons  from  another  electropositive  atom  (donor) 
called  as  reducers.  The  electrons  are  either  transferred  from 
atom to another or shared between two atoms with a bond. In 
other  words,  oxidizers  are  chemicals  that  react  with  other 
substances,  reducing  agents  or  fuels.  The  energy  released 
during   the   transfer   of   electrons   can   lead   to   increase   in 
temperature  and  can  cause  an  explosion  or  damage  to  the 
surroundings.  For  eg.  When  gasoline  reacts  with  air,  it  can 
produce a 2000 ͦ C increase in temperature and lead to a fire or 
explosion if not utilized properly. Most oxidizers like oxygen, 
fluorine,  chlorine,  chlorite,  bromated,  ozone,  permanganate, 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 75 
 
nitric  acid,  chromic  acid,  hydrogen  peroxide  act  in  different 
ways based on their electronegativity. 
Reactive chemicals 
 All   chemicals   are   capable   of   reacting   with   other 
chemicals  or  the  medium  in  which  it  is  present  except  the 
inert  ones.  When  chemicals  react  readily  or  vigorously  with 
ordinary unreactive environment such as air, water, cellulose, 
protein  or  steel,  it  is  called  reactive.  Certain  chemicals  are 
self-reactive without coming in contact with other substances. 
These  reactive  substances can  spontaneously  generate  large 
quantities of heat, light, gases or toxic chemicals. The reaction 
rate  will  increase  with  increase  in  pressure,  temperature  or 
concentrations.  Care  should  be  taken  when  working  with 
these  kind  of  reactive  chemicals  such  as explosives,  acid 
sensitives,     oxidizers,     reducers,     water     sensitives     and 
pyrophosphorics. 
 
Water reactive chemicals 
 Chemicals that react violently with water, water vapor or 
moist air to produce heat and flammable gas that can result in 
ignition  are  called as  water  reactive  chemicals.  Apart  from 
heat, the chemicals can also produce some toxic gases or any 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 76 
 
other  hazardous  substances.  This  is  the  reason  that  it  is  good 
practice to add acid to water, and not water to acid, which can 
be  explosive.  Adding  the  compound  or  acid  to  water  can  be 
safe,  because  the  surrounding  water  will  absorb  the  heat 
produced during the transfer.  
 Fire  or  combustion  can  take  place  when  water  is  poured 
on  the  material  that  is  highly  water  reactive,  for  eg.  Sodium 
reacts  with  water  and  is  highly  explosive.  Water  reactive 
materials  are  alkali  metals  (lithium,  sodium,  potassium  and 
their   hydrides),   calcium   oxides,   sulfur   trioxides,   silicon 
tetrachloride,   aluminium   chloride,   phosphorus   pentaoxide, 
tifluoromethane  sulphonic  anhydride  and chlorosulfonic  acid. 
As  water  is  present  everywhere  it  is  very  important  not  to 
dispose of these chemicals in the water directly, which can be 
very  explosive  and  leads  to  high-risk  danger  to  people  and 
property.  The  possible  damage  can  be  spontaneous  ignition 
with  production  of  heat,  release  of  toxic  substances  etc.  It  is 
not   necessary   to   have   plenty   of   water   for   spontaneous 
ignition;  even  a  little  amount  of  moisture  in  the  air  can 
penetrate the chemicals that are poorly preserved or not closed 
properly. 
Pyrophosphoric chemicals 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 77 
 
 Chemicals  that  ignite  on  exposure  to  air  at  54 ͦ C  or 
below    are    called    as    pyrophosphoric    chemicals.    These 
pyrophosphoric chemicals can be gas, solid or liquid, volatile 
or  non-volatile.  Oxygen  reacts  with  the  gas  phase  of  the 
chemical  to  result  in  combustion  of  compounds  like  boranes, 
phosphorus or triethylaluminium, metal powders etc. This is a 
very  rapid  reaction  and  gives  enough  energy  for  the  ignition. 
Many  metallic  powders are  pytophosphoric and the  reactivity 
depends  on  the  particle  size.  Solids  may  be  pyophosphoric 
when they are finely divided into small particles or when they 
are  volatile.  Oxygen  can  bind  to  a  metal  ion,  or  an  unshared 
electron pair on an alkali; water in air combines with an alkali 
metal and ignites the hydrogen to cause combustion. An alkali 
metal   binds   with   water   and   produces   a   metal   oxide   or 
hydroxide  and  hydrogen  to  produce  heat  for  ignition.  Many 
active  metals  will  directly  react  with  oxygen  can  oxidize 
completely without causing ignition. 
 
Peroxide forming chemicals 
 Peroxides  or  peroxide  forming  chemicals  are  sometimes 
hazardous    at    certain    temperature    and    pressure.    Some 
chemicals  are  converted  to  peroxides  when  exposed  to  air 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 78 
 
during    use    or    storage.    Organic    peroxides    are    very 
unpredictable  and  can  be  explosive.  Mostly  liquids  are  prone 
to form peroxides, but sometimes solids and liquefied gas can 
be    converted    to    peroxides    under    certain    temperature. 
Peroxides can be highly explosive when shaken vigorously, or 
during  rapid  heating  or  during  friction.  The  molecule  can 
rearrange  its  structure  during  initiation  and  can  be  converted 
to  non-peroxides  or  can  be  polymerized.  Aldehydes,  amines, 
mercaptans,  sulfides  and  N-alkyl  amides  are  non-peroxides 
and  are  not  harmful.  Styrene,  vinyl  acetate  and  ethyl  acetate 
will be  polymerized  and  converted  to  plastic  when  they  are 
exposed to air. 
Shock-sensitive and friction-sensitive explosives 
 Chemicals that can spontaneously explosive when struck, 
vibrated, dropped, heated or agitated and can releases a lot of 
energy  and  are called  as  shock-sensitive  explosives.  Shock-
sensitive  explosives  include  peroxides,  azides,  alkyl  azides, 
carbides,  acetylides,  nitrides,  nitrates,  fulminates,  oxides  and 
hypophosphite. Fiction-sensitive explosives are chemicals that 
explode during friction caused when opening, spilling and are 
different from shock-sensitive explosives. 
Compressed gases 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 79 
 
 Compressed  gases  can  be  explosive  when  opened  or 
released  accidently  and  can  cause  physical  and  chemical 
hazards.  Gases like  arsine,  phosphine,  phosgene, nitric  oxide, 
chlorine,  sulfur  tetrafluoride  are  kept  in  cylinders;  when  they 
are  released,  dropped  or  when  there  is  a  leakage,  it  can  be 
lethally flammable and explosive. The gas inside the cylinder 
is   highly   compressed   at   a   maximum   pressure   of   150 
atmospheres and can act as lethal projectiles when disturbed. 
Cryogenic liquids 
 A liquid with a boiling point less than or equal to -90 ͦ C 
at   the   atmospheric   pressure   is   called   cryogenic   liquid. 
Cryogenic  fluids  are  super-cooled  fluids  such  as  liquid  air, 
liquid nitrogen, liquid oxygen are odorless, colorless, tasteless 
liquids  obtained  at  extremely  cold  temperature.  Cryogenic 
hydrogen,  methane,  acetylene,  oxygen  are  flammable  gases; 
oxygen  can  increase  the  flammability.  Cryogenic  liquids  are 
hazardous  because of  the  super-cooled  state  and  are  more 
concentrated  than  its  vapor  state  and  may  rapidly  evaporate. 
Cryogenic  liquids  can  cause  fire,  explosion,  asphyxiation, 
destroy  structural  materials  and tissue  destruction.  The gas  in 
the   liquefied   solution   may   evaporate   leaving   a   dense 
flammable gas. Cryogenic liquid spill on a person or clothes is 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 80 
 
highly  dangerous  and  can  cause  injury  on  the  skin.  The 
clothes  could  trap  more  amounts  of  cold  liquid  and  can  be 
transferred  to  the  skin.  Care  should  be  taken  while  opening 
the  cryogenic  fluids;  always  opening  the  cryogenic  cans  in  a 
well-ventilated place may prevent danger. 
Health hazards 
 Chemicals  that  cause  serious  hazards  on  the  health  of  a 
person can be named as a health hazard. Toxicity is the ability 
of  a  chemical  substance  to  cause  injury  or  toxicity  when  it 
touches the skin, or inhaled or ingested by the person. Hazard 
is  the  probability  of  the  chemical  substance  that  will  pose  a 
risk  and  cause  injury  when  used  in  an  unsafe  manner.  Many 
chemicals  are  used  in  various places  in  a  day-to-day  manner. 
If these hazardous chemicals are handled properly with utmost 
care  and  caution,  various  damages  and  health  hazards  can  be 
avoided. 
 The  health  hazard  of  chemicals  depends  on  the  route  of 
entry   or   exposure,   time   of   exposure, dosage,   type   and 
frequency of exposure.  
Routes of entry 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 81 
 
 The  toxicity  of  the  chemical  can  be  avoided  by  using 
proper  preventive  and  precautionary  measures.  Care  must  be 
taken to prevent the exposure of chemicals to the body.  
Inhalation 
Breathing or inhaling a chemical is the most common route of 
entry  of  the  chemical  when  the  chemical  is  a  gas  or  volatile 
liquid  or  solid.  People  working  in  asbestos  and  silica  factory 
are  at  risk  as  there  is  a  high  possibility  of  inhaling  the 
chemical  substances  while  breathing.  The  leakage  of  the 
chemicals  can  be  easily  detected  when  they  have  an  odor. 
Overexposure  to  these  chemicals  leads  to  headache,  mucus 
production,  irritation  of  the  eye,  nose  and  throat,  dizziness, 
drowsiness, confusion and collapse. The leakage of chemicals 
can  be  avoided  by  proper  closing  of  the  chemicals,  proper 
ventilation and use of fume hoods. 
Skin and eye contact 
 The second route of entry that is very common is the skin 
and eyes. Chemicals can easily come in contact with the skin 
and  eyes  and  produce  irritation,  burn  or  rash.  Chemicals  can 
be absorbed by the skin and enter the bloodstream and lead to 
toxic   conditions,   which   may   affect   the   internal   organs. 
Chemicals can enter the skin through cuts or lacerations.  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 82 
 
 Minimum  exposure  of  the  skin  to  chemicals,  use  of  lab 
coats,  gloves,  masks,  face  shield  and  goggles  can  prevent  the 
contact  of the chemicals  to the skin  and  eyes.  If  exposed, the 
chemicals   can   cause   dryness,   redness,   swelling,   blisters, 
rashes,  itching  etc.  If  there  is  any  contact  of  the  chemicals 
with  the  skin,  the  area  should  be  washed  with  water  and 
immediate medical attention should be given. If the chemicals 
enter the eye, it can cause itching, redness and even blindness, 
which  should  be  immediately  attended  to  and  necessary  first 
aid given to the person.  
Ingestion 
 Ingestion  or  swallowing  is  the  next  most  common  route 
of entry of chemicals into the body. This can happen when we 
work  with  chemicals  without  gloves  and  do  not  wash  hands 
after working in the laboratory. We may ingest the chemicals 
accidentally    by    eating    with    hands    without    washing, 
contamination of the food or beverages in the laboratory. It is 
very  important  to  avoid  storing  food,  eating,  drinking  or 
smoking  in  the  laboratory.  We  should  take  all  care  to  avoid 
the  ingestion  of  chemicals.  In  case  a  person  happens  to 
consume  any  chemical  accidently,  he  should  be  immediately 
taken to the hospital and treated.  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 83 
 
Injection 
 Injection is another means of entry of chemicals into the 
body through the skin. Chemicals accidentally enter our body 
through  needles,  broken  glasses  or  sharp  objects  that  have 
been  contaminated  with  chemicals.  Caution  should  be  taken 
while  handling  sharp  objects in  the  laboratory.  If  there  is any 
such incident, the area on the skin should be washed with soap 
and water and taken to the hospital immediately. 
 Committees  like  General  safety  committee,  Chemical 
safety committee, Institutional biosafety committee, 
Occupational  health  committee,  Radiation  safety  committee 
should be formed to monitor the policies and safety measures 
of a laboratory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
ANALYTICAL DATA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 85 
 
INTRODUCTION TO ANALYTICAL DATA 
Analytical  data  is  a  collection  of  data  which  is  used  to 
support   decision   making   or   research.   They   are   recorded 
qualitative  and/or  quantitative  results  of  a  chemical,  physical, 
biological,  microbiological,  or  radiological  determination.  In 
other words It is the process of examining data sets in order to 
find  trends  and  draw  conclusions  about  the  information  they 
contain. 
EVALUATION OF ANALYTICAL DATA 
Evaluation  of  analytical  data  is  the  aspect  which  can 
answer  for  the  quality  assurance.  The  question  of  accuracy 
must,  in  general,  collect  attention  both  before  and  after  an 
analysis. Evaluation   is   the   integral   and   major   part   of 
Analytical   method   where   statistical   tests   are   done   to 
determine  confidence  limits  in  acquired  data.  A  number  of 
statistical techniques are used to analyze the data. Descriptive 
statistical  techniques  are  used  to  handle  the  statistical  data 
effectively. 
The purpose of this unit is to provide adequate information to 
enable examining the factors affecting the reliability of results 
and understand the contributions of errors, their types, 
  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 86 
 
minimization  of  errors  for  accuracy  and  precision  of  the 
measurement and the proper use of significant figures. 
IMPORTANCE AND STEPS INVOLVED IN 
EVALUATION OF DATA: 
Evaluation  provides  us  a  systematic  approach  to  study  a 
program,  observe,  intervention,  or  initiative  to  understand 
how well it achieves its goals. Evaluations help establish what 
works  well  and  what  could  be  improved  in  a  program  or 
initiative. 
Steps Involved: 
 
ANALYTIC AL PROCESS 
 
DEFINE PROBLEM 
 
SELECT METHOD 
 
OBTAIN SAMPLE 
  
  
 
PERFORM MEASUREMENTS 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 87 
 
ANALYZE DATA 
PRESENT RESULTS 
Key concepts of this unit: 
Precision and Accuracy Reliability 
Errors and its types 
Statistical techniques such as mean, median, mode & Standard 
deviation & 
Normal Distribution curve 
 
PRECISION AND ACCURACY 
Precision  and  accuracy  are  two  ways  that  scientists  reflect 
about error. Accuracy states to how close a measurement is to 
the  true  or  accepted  value.  Precision  defines  to  how  close 
measurements of the same item are to each other. Precision is 
independent of accuracy which means it is possible to be very 
precise  but  not  very  accurate,  and  it  is  also  possible  to  be 
accurate  without  being  precise.  If  it  is  both  accurate  and 
precise,  we  can  say  that  it  is  of  the  best  quality  scientific 
observations. 
Accuracy  and  precision  are  only  two  essential  concepts  used 
in    scientific    measurements.    Two    other    vital    aids    are 
significant   figures   and   scientific   notation.   Scientists   use 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 88 
 
percent  error  as  one  method  of  describing  how  accurate  and 
precise a value is. It's a simple but useful calculation. 
EXAMPLE 
Accurate and precise: 
• If a weather thermometer reads 75oF outside and it really 
is 75oF, the thermometer is accurate. 
  
• If   the   thermometer   consistently   registers   the   exact 
temperature for several days in a row, the thermometer is also 
precise. 
Precise, but not accurate: 
• A refrigerator thermometer is read ten times and registers 
degrees  Celsius  as:  39.1,  39.4,  39.1,  39.2,  39.1,  39.2,  39.1, 
39.1, 39.4, and 39.1. 
• However,  the  real  temperature  inside  the  refrigerator  is 
37 degrees C. 
• The thermometer isn’t accurate (it’s almost two degrees 
off the true value), but as the numbers are all close to 39.2, 
it is precise. 
 
 
RELIABILITY 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 89 
 
Research  reliability  means  to  whether  research methods  can 
reproduce the same results repeatedly. If research methods can 
produce  steady  results,  then  the methods are  likely consistent 
and not inclined by external factors. 
  
ASSESSING THE RELIABILITY IN RESEARCH 
To assess whether the research methods are producing reliable 
results, either we have to carry out the same task many times 
or in many ways. 
For example, 
 
Performing   the   same   experiment   by   different   groups   of 
people.  Performing  different  experiments  by  the  same  group 
of people. 
Both methods keep control by having one element exactly the 
same  and  changing  other  elements  to  confirm  other  factors 
don't impact the research results. 
If  a  researcher  repeats  an  experiment  with  a  different  set  of 
people  or  a  different  batch  of  the  same  chemicals  and  gets 
very  alike  results  then  those  results  are  said  to  be  reliable. 
Reliability  is  measured  by  a  percentage – if  the  obtained 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 90 
 
results are exactly the same resulting every time, then they are 
100% reliable. 
Quality  and  reliability  are  vital  terms  in  chemistry. Reliable 
analytical information implies quality. Maintaining the quality 
in  time  shows reliability.  Estimation  of  quality and  reliability 
is important for the validation of a new method of analysis. 
  
Learning  good  practice  in  chemistry  will  improve  the  quality 
of   the   laboratories   of   analysis,   by   implementing   highly 
reliable analytical methods. 
To  ensure  quality  and  reliability,  sampling  is  one  the  most 
important  tool  in  the  analytical  process.  The  sampling  plan 
must support the goals of the analysis. For example, a material 
scientist interested in describing a metal’s surface chemistry is 
more  likely  to  choose  a  freshly  exposed  surface,  created  by 
cleaving   the   sample   under   a   vacuum,   than   a   surface 
previously   exposed   to   the   atmosphere.   In   a   qualitative 
analysis, a sample is not required to be identical to the original 
substance provided there is sufficient analyte present to ensure 
its detection. In fact, if the goal of an analysis is to identify a 
trace-level  component,  it  may  be  desirable  to  discriminate 
against major components when collecting samples. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 91 
 
ERRORS 
 
If  we  measure  the  same  object  two  different  times,  the  two 
measurements  may  not  be  exactly  the  same.  That  difference 
between two measurements is called a variation or error. 
  
In quantitative analysis, the final result depends on the various 
data  observed  throughout  the  experiment,  and  sometimes  it 
might  be  wrong  if  there  are  any  errors  in  the  data  considered 
for the experiment. These errors occur due to the apparatus or 
instruments   used   in   experiments or   due   to   the   wrong 
observation carried out. If  we  measure  the  same  object  two 
different times, the two measurements may not be exactly the 
same.  That  difference  between  two  measurements  is  called  a 
variation or error. 
Important Types of Error 
Depending on the origin of errors they can be categorized into 
1. Determinate errors or systematic errors 
2. Random errors or indeterminate errors 
3. Gross Errors 
DETERMINATE ERRORS 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 92 
 
Determinate  errors  are  ones  that  can  affect  the  results  in  a 
series  of  determinations with  a  particular  sample  or  with  a 
particular  observer  or  with  a  particular  method.  Causes  of 
determinate  errors  are  Instrument  errors,  Method  errors,  and 
Personal errors. 
  
Instrument  errors  can  be  corrected  by  calibration  or  proper 
instrumentation. 
Method   errors   can   be   eliminated   with   proper   method 
development. 
Personal  errors  can  be  minimized  with  proper  training  and 
experience. 
Example 
 
Errors in reading the burette Errors in pipetting solutions Use 
of impure reagents RANDOM ERRORS 
Any  repeated  calculation  provides  slightly  differed  values, 
even  when  carried  out  with  maximum  care  and  with  similar 
conditions.  It  does  not  have  any  fixed  value  or  sign  which  is 
known  as  random  error  or  indeterminate  error.  These  errors 
are  due  to limitations in  making the  observation; lack  of  care 
in  making  measurements  etc.,  these  errors  may  be  eliminated 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 93 
 
by   using   high   precision   instruments   with   utmost   care. 
Random   or   indeterminate   errors   cannot   be   completely 
eradicated. 
  
For  Eg.  Setting  the  same  weight  on  electronic  scales  many 
times  and  obtaining  the  results  which  vary  in  a  random 
fashion from one reading to the next. The difference between 
this reading s and the actual weight correspond to the random 
error of the scale measurements. 
GROSS ERRORS 
Easily  recognized  since  they  involve  a  major  breakdown  in 
the analytical process (samples being spilt, wrong dilution, or 
wrong  using  of  instrument),  it  is  detectable  by  carrying  out 
sufficient replicate measurements. 
For  example,  writing  down  a  value  of  100  when  the  reading 
was actually 1.00 is a gross error. 
EXPRESSION OF ERROR 
The error can be expressed as a numerical difference between 
the measured value and the true value. 
Error = True value ~ Measured value. 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 94 
 
Absolute  error  (E):  It  is  the  difference  between  the  measured 
value and the true value 
  
E = Xi – Xt where Xi is the measured value and Xt is the true 
value. 
Relative  error:  It  is  the  ratio  of  the  absolute  error  to  the  true 
value. 
Er= (Xi – Xt)/ Xt. 
 
The relative error is usually expressed in terms of a percent or 
parts per thousand. 
Er= (Xi – Xt) x 100 / Xt. or Er= (Xi – Xt) x 1000 / Xt. 
 
ERROR HANDLING: 
Usually, they occur with statistical distribution and are treated 
by  statistical  methods.  An  experiment  designed  to  reveal  the 
presence  of  errors  can  be  performed.  Statistical  tests  can  be 
applied to the data to provide an estimate of the likely value of 
that error. 
Uses of Statistics in data evaluation in Chemistry: 
 
One of the uses of statistics in analytical chemistry is 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 95 
 
therefore to  provide  an  estimate  of  the  likely  value  of  that 
error; 
  
in other words, to establish the uncertainty associated with the 
measurement 
Definition of some statistical terms: 
In  statistics,  we  lean  towards  representing  a  set  of  data  by  a 
representative  value  which  would  approximately  define  the 
entire   collection.   This   representative   value   is   called   the 
measure of central tendency, and the name suggests that it is a 
value   around   which   the   data   is   centered.   These   central 
tendencies are mean, median, and mode. 
 
 
Mean is the most generally used measure of central tendency. 
It is the average of the given collection of data. It is applicable 
for both continuous and discrete data. 
It is equal to the sum of all the values in the collection of data 
divided by the total number of values. 
  
Suppose  we  have  n  number  values  in  a  set  of  data  namely as 
x1, x2, x3... xn, then the mean of data is given by: 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 96 
 
x ̄=(x1+x2+x3+........+x) / n 
Data may be given in raw form or tabular form. Let's find the 
mean in both cases. 
Raw Data 
Let x1, x2, x3 , . . . , xn be n observations. 
We  can  find  the  arithmetic  mean  using  the  mean  formula. 
Mean, x
̄
 = (x1 + x2 + ... + xn) / n 
Example: 1. 
If  the  heights  of  5  people  are  142  cm,  150  cm,  149  cm,  156 
cm, and 153 cm. Find the mean height. 
Solution: 
Mean height, x
̄
 = (142 + 150 + 149 + 156 + 153) / 5 
= 750 / 5 
= 150 
Mean, x
̄
 = 150 cm 
Thus, the mean height is 150 cm. 
  
Example: 2. 
Find the mean of the first 10 odd integers. 
Solution: 
First 10 odd integers: 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19 Mean = 
Sum of the first 10 odd integers/Number of such integers 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 97 
 
= (1 + 3 + 5 + 7 + 9 + 11 + 13 + 15 + 17 + 19) /10 
= 100 /10 
= 10 
 
Frequency Distribution (Tabular) Form 
When the data is present in tabular form, we use the following 
formula: 
Mean, x
̄
 = (x1f1 + x2f2 + ... + xnfn) / (f1 + f2 + ... + fn) 
 
Example 3: 
Find the mean of the following distribution: 
 
X 4 6 9 10 15 
F 5 10 10 7 8 
  
Solution: 
 
Calculation table for arithmetic mean: 
 
 
xi fi xifi 
4 5 20 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 98 
 
6 10 60 
9 10 90 
10 7 70 
15 8 120 
 ∑ fi = 40 ∑ xi fi = 360 
 
Mean, x
̄
 = (∑xi fi) / (∑fi) 
 
= 360 / 40 
= 9 
 
Thus the solution is 9 
  
Example 4: 
 
Here  is  an  example  where  the  data  is  in  the  form  of  class 
intervals. The following table indicates the data on the number 
of customers visiting a car service centre in a month. Find the 
average  number  of  customers  visiting  the  service  centre  in  a 
day. 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 99 
 
Number of customers Number   of   days   visiting   service 
centre 
0-10 2 
10-20 6 
20-30 9 
30-40 7 
40-50 4 
50-60 2 
  
Solution: 
 
In this case, we find the mid-point or class mark of a class for 
each class. 
Note: Class mark = (lower limit + upper limit)/2 
 
Let  x1,  x2,  x3  ,  .  .  .  ,  xn  be  the  class  marks  of  the  respective 
classes. 
Hence, we get the following table: 
 
 
Class mark (xi) frequency (fi)  
xifi 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 100 
 
5 2 10 
15 6 90 
25 9 225 
35 7 245 
  
45 4 180 
55 2 110 
 
Total  
∑ fi = 30 ∑ fixi = 860 
 
Mean, x
̄
 = (∑ xifi)/(∑ fi) 
 
= 860/30 
= 28.67 
 
x
̄
 = 28.67 
 
Example 5 
 
Consider  the  following  frequency  distribution.  Calculate  the 
mean weight of students. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 101 
 
 
Weight (in kg) 31- 
35 36 – 
40 41 – 
45 46 – 
50 51 – 
55 56 – 
60 61 – 
65 66 – 
70 71 – 
75 
Number of Students 9 6 15 3 1 2 2 1
 1 
Solution: 
The given distribution has discontinuous class intervals, so we 
need to make them continuous. 
  
Class intervals Number of students (fi) Class mark (xi) di 
= xi – a fidi 
30.5 – 35.5 9 33 -10 -90 
35.5 – 40.5 6 38 -5 -25 
40.5 – 45.5 15 43 = a 0 0 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 102 
 
45.5 – 50.5 3 48 5 15 
50.5 – 55.5 1 53 10 10 
55.5 – 60.5 2 58 15 30 
60.5 – 65.5 2 63 20 40 
65.5 – 70.5 1 68 25 25 
70.5 – 75.5 1 73 30 30 
Total ∑fi = 40   ∑fidi = 35 
 
 
 
Here, ∑fi = 40 and ∑fidi = 35 
  
By Assumed mean method, Mean = a + (∑fidi/∑fi) 
= 43 + (35/40) 
= 43 + 0.875 
= 43.875 
Therefore, the mean weight of the students is 43.875 kg. 
MEDIAN 
 
The   value   of   the   middlemost   observation,   obtained  after 
arranging the data in ascending or descending order, is called 
the median of the data. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 103 
 
For example, consider the data: 4, 4, 6, 3, 2. let’s arrange this 
data in ascending order: 2, 3, 4, 4, 6. There are 5 observations. 
Thus, median = middle value i.e. 4. 
Case 1: Ungrouped Data 
 
• Step  1:  Arrange  the  data  in  ascending  or  descending 
order 
• Step 2: Let the total number of observations be n. 
  
To find the median, we need to consider if n is even or odd. If 
n is odd, then use the formula: 
Median = (n + 1)/2th observation 
 
Example 6: Let's consider the data: 56, 67, 54, 34, 78, 43, and 
23. What is the median? 
 
Solution: 
 
Arranging  in  ascending  order,  we  get:  23,  34,  43,  54,  56,  67, 
and 
78. Here, n (number of observations) = 7 So, (7 + 1) / 2 = 4 
∴ Median = 4th observation Median = 54 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 104 
 
If n is even, then use the formula: 
 
Median = [(n/2)th obs.+ ((n/2) + 1)th obs.] / 2. 
 
Example 7: Let's consider the data: 50, 67, 24, 34, 78 and 43. 
What is the median? 
  
Solution: 
 
Arranging  in  ascending  order,  we  get:  24,  34,  43,  50,  67  and 
78. Here, n (no. of observations) = 6 
6/2 = 3 
 
Using the median formula, Median = (3rd obs. + 4th obs.)/2 
= (43 + 50) / 2 
 
Median = 46.5 
 
Case 2: Grouped Data 
 
When  the  data  is  continuous  and  in  the  form  of  a  frequency 
distribution, the median is found as shown below: 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 105 
 
Step 1: Find the median class. 
 
Let n = total number of observations i.e. ∑ fi 
 
Note: Median Class is the class where (n/2) lies. 
 
Step 2: Use the following formula to find the median. 
  
Median = l + ((n/2 – c)/f ) x h where, 
• l = lower limit of median class 
• c =  cumulative  frequency  of  the  class  preceding  the 
median class 
• f = frequency of the median class 
• h = class size 
 
Let's consider the following example to understand this better. 
 
 
 
Example:   8.   Find   the   median   marks   for   the   following 
distribution: 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 106 
 
Classes 0-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 
Frequency 2 12 22 8 6 
  
Solution: 
 
We  need  to  calculate  the  cumulative  frequencies  to  find  the 
median. 
Calculation table: 
 
 
 
Classes Number of students Cumulative frequency 
0-10 2 2 
10-20 12 2 + 12 = 14 
20-30 22 14 + 22 = 36 
30-40 8 36 + 8 = 44 
40-50 6 44 + 6 = 50 
 
N = 50 
 
N/2 = 50/2 = 25 
  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 107 
 
Median Class = (20 - 30) 
 
l = 20, f = 22, c = 14, h = 10 
 
Using Median formula: 
 
Median = l + ((n/2 – c)/f) x h 
 
= 20 + (25 - 14)/22 × 10 
 
= 20 + (11/22) × 10 
 
= 20 + 5 = 25 ∴ Median = 25 
Example 9: 
If  the  median  of  a  distribution  given  below  is  28.5, then  find 
the value of x and y. 
CI 0 – 
10 10 – 
20 20 – 
30 30 – 
40 40 – 
50 50 – 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 108 
 
60 Total 
Frequency 5 x 20 15 y 5 60 
Solution: 
From the given, N/2 = 60 / 2 = 30 
Median of the given data = 28.5 
Median class is 20 – 30 with a cumulative frequency = 25 + x. 
Lower limit of median class = l = 20 
Frequency of the median class = f = 20 
Cumulative frequency of the class preceding the median class 
= cf = 5 + x 
Class size = h = 10 
Median = l + ((n/2 – c)/f ) x h 
28.5 = 20 + [(30 − 5 − x)/ 20] × 10 
28.5 – 20 = (25 – x)/2 
8.5 × 2 = 25 – x 
17 = 25 – x 
x = 25 – 17 
Implies x = 8 
Also, 
60 = 5 + 20 + 15 + 5 + x + y 
60 = 5 + 20 + 15 + 5 + 8 + y 
y = 60 – 53 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 109 
 
Implies y = 7 
Solution is x = 8 and y = 7. 
MODE 
 
The value which  appears  most  often  in  the  given data  i.e.  the 
observation  with  the  highest  frequency  is  called  a  mode  of 
data. 
Case 1: Ungrouped Data 
For  ungrouped  data,  we  just  need  to  identify  the  observation 
which occurs maximum times. 
Mode = Observation with maximum frequency 
For  example  in  the  data:  6,  8,  9,  3,  4,  6,  7,  6,  3,  the  value  6 
appears the most number of times. Thus, mode = 6. An 
easy way to remember mode is: Most Often Data Entered. 
Note:  A  data  may  have  no  mode,  1  mode,  or  more  than  1 
mode.  Depending  upon  the  number  of  modes  the  data  has,  it 
can be called unimodal, bimodal, trimodal, or multimodal. 
The  example  discussed  above  has  only  1  mode,  so  it  is 
unimodal. 
Case 2: Grouped Data 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 110 
 
When the data is continuous, the mode can be found using the 
following steps: 
• Step  1:  Find  modal  class  i.e.  the  class  with  maximum 
frequency. 
• Step 2: Find mode using the following formula: 
 
Mode = l + [( fm – f1)/(2 fm – f1 – f2)] x h where, 
• l = lower limit of modal class, 
• fm = frequency of modal class, 
• f1 = frequency of class preceding modal class, 
• f2 = frequency of class succeeding modal class, 
• h = class width 
 
Consider the following example to understand the formula. 
Example: 10. Find the mode of the given data: 
Marks Obtained  
0-20 20- 
40  
40-60 60- 
80 80- 
100 
Number of students  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 111 
 
5  
10  
12  
6  
3 
Solution: 
The  highest  frequency  =  12,  so  the  modal  class  is  40-60.  l  = 
lower limit of modal class = 40 
fm = frequency of modal class = 12 
f1  =  frequency  of  class  preceding  modal  class  =  10  f2  = 
frequency of class succeeding modal class = 6 h = class width 
= 20 
Using the mode formula, 
Mode = l + [( fm – f1) / (2 fm – f1 – f2)] x h 
 
= 40 + [(12−10)/(2×12−10−6)]×20 
 
= 40 + (2/8) × 20 
 
= 45 
 
∴ Mode = 45 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 112 
 
 
Relation between Mean, Median, and Mode 
 
The  three  measures of  central  values  i.e.  mean,  median,  and 
mode  are  closely  connected  by  the  following  relations  called 
an empirical relationship 
2Mean + Mode = 3Median 
For  instance,  if  we  are  asked  to  calculate  the  mean,  median, 
and  mode  of  continuous  grouped  data,  then  we  can  calculate 
the  mean  and  median  using  the  formulas  as  discussed  in  the 
previous  sections  and  then  find  the  mode  using  the  empirical 
relation. 
Example11: 
If we have data whose mode = 65 and median = 61.6 then find 
the mean. 
We  can  find  the  mean  using  the  above  mean,  median,  and 
mode relation. 
2Mean + Mode = 3 Median 
 
∴2Mean = 3 × 61.6 - 65 
 
∴2Mean = 119.8 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 113 
 
 
⇒ Mean = 119.8/2 
 
⇒ Mean = 59.9 
 
Example: 12. 
If the mean of the given frequency distribution is 35, then find 
the missing frequency y. Also, calculate the median and mode 
for the distribution. 
  
Class 10 – 20 20 – 30 30 – 40 40 – 50 50 – 60 
Frequency 2 4 7 y 1 
Solution: 
 
 
Class Frequency (fi) Class mark (xi) fixi 
10 – 20 2 15 30 
20 – 30 4 25 100 
30 – 40 7 35 245 
40 – 50 y 45 45y 
50 – 60 1 55 55 
Total ∑fi = 14 + y  ∑fixi = 430 + 45y 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 114 
 
 
As we know, Mean = ∑fixi / ∑fi 
Given that the mean of the distribution is 35. So, (430 + 45y) / 
(14 + y) = 35 
  
430 + 45y = (14 + y) 35 
430 + 45y = 490 + 35y 
45y – 35y = 490 – 430 
10y = 60 
y = 6 
Thus, the missing frequency is 6. 
Now, we can calculate the mode as follows: 
 
 
Class 10 – 20 20 – 30 30 – 40 40 – 50 50 – 60 
Frequency 2 4 = f0 7 = f1 6 = f2 1 
 
Here, l = 30 
h = 10 
Mode = l + [(f1 – f0) / (2f1 – f0 – f2)] × h Mode = 30 + [(7 – 
4) / (14 – 4 – 6)] × 10 
= 30 + (30/4) 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 115 
 
= 30 + 7.5 
  
= 37.5 
Now,  using  the  formula  Mode  =  3Median – 2  Mean,  we  can 
get the value of median. 
37.5  =  3  Median – 2  (35)  3  Median  =  37.5  +  70  Median  = 
107.7 / 3 = 35.9 
STANDARD DEVIATION 
 
Standard deviation is the positive square root of the variance. 
Standard  deviation  is  one  of  the  basic  methods  of  statistical 
analysis.  Standard  deviation  is  commonly  abbreviated  as  SD 
and denoted by 'σ’ and it tells about the value and how much 
it has deviated from the mean value. 
Steps to Calculate Standard Deviation 
 
• Find  the  mean,  which  is  the  arithmetic  mean  of  the 
observations. 
• Find  the  squared  differences  from  the  mean.  (The  data 
value - mean)2 
  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 116 
 
• Find the average of the squared differences. (Variance = 
The sum of squared differences ÷ the number of observations) 
• Find the square root of variance. (Standard deviation = 
√Variance) 
 
The formula for Calculating Standard Deviation 
 
The population standard deviation formula is given as: 
• σ=√ 
푁 
  
∑ (Xi−μ)2 which ∑ varies from 1 to N 
 
Here, 
• σ = Population standard deviation 
• μ = Assumed mean 
 
Similarly, the sample standard deviation formula is: 
 
 
  
• s =√ 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 117 
 
푛−1 
  
∑ (Xi−푋̅)2 where ∑ varies from 1 to n 
Here, 
s = Sample standard deviation 
푋̅ = Arithmetic mean of the observations 
Example: 13. 
Let's calculate the standard deviation for the data given below: 
xi 6 10 12 14 24 
fi 2 3 4 5 4 
 
Calculate mean (푋̅) : (6+8 +10+12+ 14) / 5 = 10 
xi fi fixi xi- 푋̅ (xi−푋̅)2 fi(xi−푋̅)2 
6 2 12 -4 16 32 
8 3 24 -2 4 12 
10 4 40 0 0 0 
12 5 60 2 4 20 
14 4 56 4 16 64 
 18 192   128 
  
N = 18, ∑ fixi = 192, ∑ fi(xi− x
̄
 )2 = 128 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 118 
 
 
  
Calculate variance: σ2 = 1 
푁 
  
∑ (Xi−μ)2 where ∑ varies from 1 to N 
  
 
= 1/18 × 128 = 7.1 
 
Calculate SD: σ = √Variance = √ 7.1 = 2.66 
 
Example 14: 
 
During  a  survey,  6  students  were  asked  how many  hours  per 
day they study on an average. Their answers were as follows: 
2, 6, 5, 3, 2, 3. Evaluate the standard deviation. 
Solution: 
Find the mean of the data: (2+6+5+3+2+3)/6 
= 3.5 
Step 2: Construct the table: 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 119 
 
 
x1 x1 − x
̄
 (x1 − x
̄
 )2 
2 -1.5 2.25 
6 2.5 6.25 
  
5 1.5 2.25 
3 -0.5 0.25 
2 -1.5 2.25 
3 -0.5 0.25 
= 13.5  
   
Step 3: Now, use the Standard Deviation formula 
Sample Standard Deviation = s =√ 1 
푛−1 
∑ (Xi−푋̅)2 where 
∑ varies from 1 to n. Implies 
=√(13.5/[6-1]) 
=√[2.7] s =1.643 
NORMAL DISTRIBUTION CURVE 
A  normal  distribution  which  is  also  known  as  the  Gaussian 
distribution is a 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 120 
 
The probability distribution that is symmetric about the mean, 
shows that data near the mean are more frequent in occurrence 
than  data  far  from  the  mean.  In  graphical  form, the  normal 
distribution appears as a "bell curve". 
Characteristics of a normal distribution 
 
The    normal    distribution    is    a    continuous    probability 
distribution  that is  symmetrical  on  both  sides  of the  mean,  so 
the right side of the center is a mirror image of the left side. 
• The mean, median, and mode are all equal. 
• The curve is known to be symmetric at the center, which 
is around the mean. 
• Exactly 1/2 of all the values are known to be to the left of 
the  center  whereas  exactly  half  of  all  the  values are  to  the 
right of the center. 
• The  area  under  the  normal  distribution  curve  represents 
probability and the total area under the curve sums to one. 
DISTRIBUTION OF RANDOM ERRORS 
Random   errors   are   distributed   normally   which   means   it 
follows a normal distribution 
 
  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 121 
 
P(x) = 1 
휎√2휋 
 
μ = Mean 
  
−1/2(푥−μ) 
푒 휎 
σ = Standard deviation 
x = Normal random variable 
Example: 15 
Find    the    probability    density    function    for    the    normal 
distribution where mean = 4 and standard deviation = 2 and x 
= 3. 
Solution: 
Given: 
Mean, μ = 4 
Standard deviation, σ = 2 
  
Random variable, x = 3. 
We know that the normal distribution formula is: 
 
  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 122 
 
P(x) = 1 
휎√2휋 
  
−1/2(푥−μ) 
푒 휎 
  
 
Now, substitute the values in the formula, we get 
f(x)=0.19947   ×   e−0.125   f(x)=0.19947   ×   0.882496 
f(x)=0.17603 
Therefore,  the  probability  density  function  for  the  normal 
distribution is 0.17603. 
For  a  perfectly  normal  distribution  the  mean,  median  and 
mode will be the same value, visually represented by the peak 
of the curve. 
The normal distribution has 
Mean = Median = Mode 
Symmetric about the center 
50%  of  values  less  than  the  mean  and  50%  greater  than  the 
mean. 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 123 
 
REFERENCES: 
1. Random    Errors    in    Chemical    Analysis    ,    Source 
slideplayer.com/Fundamentals  of  Analytical  Chemistry,  F.J. 
Holler, S.R.Crouch. 
2. Analysis  of  random  errors  in  physical  measurements:  A 
PRIMER, Dr. Pramod Joag,Department of Physics, University 
of Pune. 
3. Analytical   Chemistry,   David   Harvey,   Source   URL: 
http://www.asdlib.org/onlineArticles/ecourseware/Analytical
%2 0Chemistry%202.0/Text_Files.html 
5. Chemical    Analysis,    A    series    of    Monographs    on 
Analytical  Chemistry  and  its  Applications,  J.D.  Winefordner, 
Volume 153, A Wiley – Inter Science Publication. 
6. Using Data Analysis to Evaluate and Compare Chemical 
Syntheses, Dustin Kaiser, Jianbo Yang, ACS publications. 
7. Evaluation  of  Water  quality  in  the  Tigris  River  within 
Baghdad, Iraq using Multivariate Statistical Techniques 
Salwan  Ali  Abed,  Salam  Hussein  Ewaid  and  Nadhir  Al-
Ansari, Journal of Physics. 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
STATISTICAL TREATMENT OF 
FINITE SAMPLES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 125 
 
STATISTICAL TREATMENT OF FINITE SAMPLES: 
Statistical  treatment  of  data  is  when  you  apply  some  form  of 
statistical method to a data set to transform it from a group of 
meaningless  numbers  into  meaningful  output.  For  example, 
consider  a  medical  study  that  is  investigating  the  effect  of  a 
drug   on   the   human   population.   As   the   drug   can   affect 
different people in different ways based on parameters such as 
gender, age and rac e, the researchers would want to group the 
data  into  different  subgroups  based  on  these  parameters  to 
determine how each one affects the effectiveness of the drug. 
Categorizing the data in this way is an example of performing 
basic statistical treatment. 
In  another  example,  a  researcher  wants  to  investigate  the 
biochemical   content   (total   proteins,   cellulose,   lignin,   and 
starch)   in   plant   leaves   related   to   their   optical   properties 
through  statistical  relationships.  The  collection  of  data  based 
on    sample    selection    from    dry    or    fresh    leaves,   their 
biochemical   contents   along   with   physical   measurements 
(blade thickness, water content, specific leaf area) will help in 
inferring the results for whole population.  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 126 
 
A  sample  is  a  subset  (a  finite  number  of  measures)  selected 
from  the  population,  which  is  the  entire  set  of measurements 
(which can be infinitely vast). 
Greek  letters  (such  as  μ,  s)  are  used  by  statisticians  for 
population parameters, while English letters (such as x and s) 
are used for finite samples. 
Statistical treatment can be either descriptive statistics, which 
describes  the  relationship  between  variables  in  a  population, 
or  inferential  statistics,  which  tests  a  hypothesis  by  making 
inferences from the collected data. 
 
Several types of descriptive measures can be computed from a 
set  of  data.  In  this  chapter,  however,  we  limit  discussion  to 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 127 
 
measures  of  central  tendency  and  measures  of  dispersion. 
Measures  of  central  tendency  convey  information  regarding 
the average value of a set of values. The three most commonly 
used  measures  of  central  tendency  are  the  mean,  the  median, 
and the mode.  
Mean: 
The mean is the most widely used measure 
of  the  central  value. The  mean  of  a  finite 
number of measurements, x
l
, x
2
, x
3
, x
4
, 
........, x
n
, is commonly represented as x.  
Population mean is represented by μ 
 
Median:  
It   represents   the   middle   score   of   the 
distribution   and   relatively   unaffected   by 
extreme scores. The value of 
the middlemost     observation,     obtained 
after   arranging the   data   in ascending or 
descending  order,  is  called  the median of 
the data. 
If n is odd 
 
If n is even 
 
Mode 
It  is  the  most  frequently  occurring  value  in 
 
Mode  =  3  Median 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 128 
 
a  set  of  data  and  particularly  useful  in the 
study of popular sizes. Mode is the average 
to be used to find the ideal size in a series. 
 
– 2 Mean 
Average Deviation (or Mean Deviation): 
 It is the average of the differences between 
the  individual  results  and  the  mean.  It  is 
regarded as  a  measure  of  variability.  In  the 
case  of  a  small  number  of  observations  the 
average  deviation  is  found  to  be  not  quite 
significant statistically. 
 
 
Standard Deviation: 
It is the distance from the mean to the point 
of   inflexion   of   the   normal   distribution 
curve.    In    comparison    to    the    average 
deviation the ‘standard deviation’ is usually 
considered  to  be  much  more  useful  and 
meaningful statistically. For a finite number 
of values it is normally symbolised as ‘S’. 
 
The  standard  deviation  is  related  to  normal 
distribution in the following way. The mean 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 129 
 
 
  
Example:  Calculate    central    tendency    measures    and 
deviations for following data set: 
30,55,65,60,25,45,35,70,60,50 
 
plus   or   minus   one   standard   deviation 
includes  68%  of  the  population.  The  mean 
±2SD  includes  95%  of  the  population  and 
mean     ±3SD includes     99%     of     the 
population. 
 
Coefficient of Variation (ν) 
The  coefficient  of  variation  (ν)  is  simply 
the  standard  deviation(s)  expressed  as  a 
percentage of the mean ( x’ ) 
 
Variance (s
2
) 
The spread of the data set — how far apart 
the numbers are in relation to the mean 
The  variance  is  the  square  of  the  standard 
deviation(s) i.e., s
2
 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 130 
 
• Mean    = 30  +  55  +  65  +  60  +  25  +  45+  35+  70  +  60  + 
50/10 = 49.5 
 
For Median, first arrange data into descending or ascending  
25,30,35,45,50,55,60,60,65,70 
• Median = (50+55)/2= 52.5 
 
• Mode = 60 
 
• Average  deviation  =  Sum  of  differences/  number  of 
sample 
= [-19.5 +5.5 + 15.5 + 10.5+ (-24.5) + (-4.5) + 
(-14.5) + 20.5+ +10.5 + 0.5] / 10 
= 12.6 
• Standard  deviation  (sample)  = √[(30−49.5)
2
+(55−
49.5)
2
+ (65−49.5)
2 
+ (60−49.5)
2 
+ (25−49.5)
2 
+ 
(45−49.5)
2 
+ (35−49.5)
2 
+ (70−49.5)
2 
+(60−
49.5)
2
+ (50−49.5)
2]
 / (10-1) 
Standard deviation = 15.3568 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 131 
 
• Variance = (Standard deviation)
2
 = (15.3568)
2
 = 235.83 
 
• Coefficient of variation = (15.3568/ 49.5) *100 = 31.02 
 
 
 
  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 132 
 
STUDENT T-TEST: 
William  Sealy  Gosset  (a  brewmaster)  had  invented  a  new 
method for determining how large a sample of persons should 
be  used  in the taste-testing  of  beer.  In  1908,  he published  his 
findings  in   the   journal   Biometrika   under   the   pseudonym 
'student.' This is how t- test got name as 'student's t. T-test is a 
method of testing hypothesis about the mean of small sample 
drawn   from   a   normally   distributed   population   when   the 
standard  deviation  for  the  sample  is  unknown. It  can  also  be 
used  to  test  the  difference  between  the  mean  of  two  sets  of 
data’s  ( ̅
1
 and 푥̅
2
 ). The  purpose  of  the  test  is  to  compare  the 
mean  of  samples  with  some  standard  value  and  to  express 
some level of confidence in the significance of comparison. It 
helps  us  understand  if  the  difference  between  two  sample 
means is real or simply due to chance. 
Degree  of  freedom:  It  may  be  defined  as  the  number  of 
individual  observations  that  could  be  allowed  to  vary  under 
the condition that 푥̅ and s, once determined, be held constant. 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 133 
 
 
 
Important Formula with calculations: 
I. One-sample  t-test: The  one-sample  t-test  is  a  statistical 
method   for   determining   whether   a   sample's   mean 
deviates significantly from  the population  mean.  Sample 
should be continuous variable and normally distributed. 
 
 
 
Problem   statement: The   cholesterol   levels   (mg/100   of 
serum) in a group of 7 individuals after taking a drug are 231, 
258,  245,199,  195,  208  and  205.  Find  whether  the  drug  is 
effective in reducing the cholesterol level in man. The normal 
cholesterol level in human is 190mg/100 of serum. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 134 
 
Hypothesis:  
H
0 
: μ = 190mg/100 of serum 
H
1
 : μ ≠ 190mg/100 of serum 
 
Decision rule: the degree of freedom is (n-1) = 6. The t table 
value at 0.05 alpha level is ±2.45. The null hypothesis will be 
rejected  if  T  observed  value  less  than -2.45  and  greater  than 
+2.45. 
 
T = (220.14 – 190) / (24.58/√7) = 3.2446 
Result: The  observed  value,  t  =  3.245,  is  greater  than  the 
critical table value, t = +2.45. The null hypothesis is rejected. 
There is a significant difference in the mean cholesterol levels 
of  sample  mean  from  normal  cholesterol  levels.  As  the  mean 
sample  value  is  higher,  inferring  that  drug  is  not  effective  in 
reducing the cholesterol levels. 
  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 135 
 
 
II. Independent t-test or Unpaired t -test: is an inferential 
statistic  that  tests  if  there  is  a  statistically  significant 
difference    between    the    means    of    two    unrelated 
(independent)  groups.  This  test  is  performed  using  a 
categorical variable with two classes (Grouping variable) 
and  a  continuous  normally  distributed  variable  (Test 
variable). 
Example:  The  unpaired  T-test  would  be  used  to  determine  if 
there  is  a  significant  difference  between  the  control  and 
treated enzyme activities. 
 
 
Problem  statement: Transverse  diameter  measurements  on 
the  hearts  of  adult  males  and  females  gave  the  following 
results: 
Group Sample size 
푥̅  (cm) 
S (cm) 
Male 15 13.21 1.05 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 136 
 
Female 12 11.00 1.01 
 
Hypothesis:  
 
Decision rule: Because the hypotheses are = and ≠ this test is 
two  tailed. The degrees  of  freedom  are  25  (15 +  12 - 2  =  25) 
and  alpha  is  .05.  The  t  table  requires  an  alpha  value  for  one 
tail only, and, because it is a two-tailed test, alpha is split from 
.05 to .025 to obtain the table t value: t.
025,25
 = ±2.060. 
 
The null hypothesis will be rejected if the observed t value is 
less than -2.060 or greater than +2.060. 
 
        
 
t = (13.21- 11)/ √[(1.05)
2
/15] + (1.01)
2
/12] = 5.5261 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 137 
 
Result:  The  observed  value,  t  =  5.5261,  is  greater  than  the 
critical table value, t = +2.06, the observed value of t is in the 
rejection  region.  The  null  hypothesis  is  rejected.  There  is  a 
significant difference in the mean scores of the two tests. 
III. Paired  T-test  or  Dependent  samples  t-test  : Used  to 
test   if   there   is   a   statistically   significant   difference 
between  the  means  of  two  sets  of  paired  observations. 
The  same  subjects  are  measured  twice,  or  observed  in 
two different ways, in this experiment. This test requires 
the  use  of  paired  variables  (pre  and  post  observations  of 
the  same  participants),  which  must  be  continuous  and 
normally distributed. 
Example:  The  paired  T-test  would  be  used  to  determine  if 
there  is  a  significant  difference  between  the  pre- and  post-
treatment blood pressures. 
 
 
Degree of freedom (df) = n-1 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 138 
 
Problem  statement:  The  table  below  shows  the  hours  of 
relief  provided  by  two  analgesic  drugs  in  5  patients  suffering 
from  arthritis.  Is  there  any  evidence  that  one  drug  provides 
longer relief than the other? 
 
Patients Drug A-
Relief in 
hours 
Drug    B-
Relief   in 
hours 
D D
2 
1 3 5 2 4 
2 3.6 5.7 2.1 4.41 
3 7.4 10.2 2.8 7.84 
4 7 6.5 -0.5 0.25 
5 2 4 2 4 
 Mean = 4.6 Mean     = 
6.28 
ΣD = 8.4 
ΣD/N  = 
1.68 
ΣD
2 
= 
20.5 
 
 
Hypothesis: The relief provided by Drug A and B is equal. 
Decision rule: The degree of freedom = n-1 = 5-1 = 4. T table 
value at df=4 at 0.05 alpha = 2.78  
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 139 
 
T = 1.68 / √[20.5 – (8.4)2/5)] / 4*5 = 1.68/0.565 = 2.97 
 
Result:  The  observed  value,  t  =  2.97,  is greater  than  the 
critical  table  value,  t  =  2.78,  the  observed  value  of  t  is  in  the 
rejection  region.  The  null  hypothesis  is  rejected.  There  is  a 
significant   difference   in   the   mean   scores   relief   in   hours 
patients  are  getting.  Based  on  the  mean  value  it  can be 
concluded that Drug B is more effective compared to drug A 
in providing longer hours relief. 
F-TEST 
A  statistical  technique  used  to  compare  the  means  between 
three  or  more  groups  is  known  as  ANOVA  or  F  test.  The  F 
test  is  based  on  the  null  hypothesis that  the  two  population 
variances under consideration are equal. 
 
Decision rule: 
To  test  null  hypothesis  for  the  two  sets  of  data  by  F  test,  the 
calculated  value  of  F  is  compared  with  the  corresponding 
tabular value of F. On comparison  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 140 
 
 
(i) If Fcalc < Ftab, 
that is if the experimental F is smaller than the corresponding 
tabular value of F, then no statistically significant difference is 
indicated  between  s1  and  s2  (i.e.  between  two  sets  of  data), 
and the null hypothesis is valid, and 
 
 (ii)  If  Fcalc  >  Ftab,  then  s1  is  significantly  greater  than  s2, 
and the null hypothesis is not valid. 
 
For  example,  suppose  in  two  series  of  observations,  one  of  6 
observations  having  standard  deviation  0.04  and  another  of  8 
observations  of  standard  deviation  0.06.  We  have  to  test 
whether   there   is   significant   difference   between   the   two 
standard deviations.  
In  above  case  consider  greater  standard  deviation  is  s
1
=  0.06 
and  s
2
=  0.04.  Hence,  degree  of  freedom  (df1)  =8-1=  7  and 
df2= 6-1= 5. 
F 
calc
 = V1/V2 = s
1
2
/s
2
2
 = (0.06)
2
/ (0.04)
2
 = 2.25 
F 
tab
 =    (at α = 0.05) = 4.88 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 141 
 
  
The above findings proved that Fcalc < Ftab, it is inferred that 
null hypothesis is valid and there is no statistically significant 
difference  between  the  standard  deviations  of  the  two  sets  of 
data   or   statistically   no   significant   difference   is   observed 
between the precisions of the two sets of data.  
One way ANOVA: 
For  current  study  we  will  illustrate  one  way  ANOVA.  The 
One-way  ANOVA  is  also  called  a  single  factor  analysis  of 
variance  because  there  is  only one  independent  variable  or 
factor.  The  One-way  ANOVA  is  extension  of  independent 
samples t test  where,  means  are  compared  among  three  or 
more independent groups. It is not advisable to run multiple t-
tests as there is always the potential for making a Type I error. 
The typical margin of error is 5%. The probability of "making 
a mistake" doubles to 10% when two t-tests are performed on 
the same data. 
For one way ANOVA, the dependent variable should measure 
on  continuous  scale  and  one  categorical  independent variable 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 142 
 
has at least three categories. For example, reduction in weight 
using three diets (Diet A, B & C). 
Post-hoc  test  in  ANOVA: One-way  ANOVA  is  an  omnibus 
test statistic; therefore it does not tell you which groups were 
statistically  different  from  one  other;  instead,  it  shows  you 
that  there  were  at  least  two  groups  with  different  means. 
Whether your study has three, four, five, or more groups, it is 
crucial  to  identify  the  differences  between  them.  A  post  hoc 
test will allow you to do this. 
 
 
Problem  statement:  The  Chloride  content  (mg/lit)  of  a  river 
at  a  particular  site  collected  from  three  different  seasons  are 
given  below.  Find  the  mean  and  standard  deviation.  Analyze 
the  significance  of  variance.  Infer  the  variance  in  oxygen 
content for different seasons. 
Hypothesis: 
H
0
 :  μ1 = μ2 = μ3 (“ The mean Chloride content of all the 3 
seasons are equal.”) 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 143 
 
 
Winter Monsoon Post monsoon 
70 68 65 
74 62 87 
61 78 92 
53 85 58 
82 72 73 
푿
̅
1
   = 68 푿
̅
ퟐ =    73 푿
̅
ퟑ = 75 
Grand mean = 68+73+75/3  = 72 
 
Step   2:   Calculate   SSC   (sum   of   square   column/between) 
 
SSC = 5 (68-72)² + 5(73-72)² + 5(75-72)² = 130 
 
Step  3:  Calculate  SSW  (Sum  of  squares  for  variance  within 
samples (or SS within). 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 144 
 
SSW  =  {  (70-68)²+(74-68)²+(61-68)²+  (53-68)²+  (82-68)²}  + 
{(68-73)²+  (62-73)²+  (78-73)²+  (85-73)²+(72-73)²}  +  {(65-
75)²+ (87-75)² + (92-75)² +(58-75)²+ (73-75)² } 
SSW= 1652 
Step 4: Sum of square Total (SST) 
SS for total variance = SS between + SS within = 1782 
 
Step 5: Degree of Freedom and Mean sum of square 
df  numerator  =  k-1=  3-1  =  2,  df  denominator  =  n-k  =  15-3  = 
12, df total = n-1=14 
MS between = SS between/ df numerator = 130/2 =65 
MS within = SS within/ df denominator = 1652/12 = 137.67 
 
F-test = MSbetween/Mswithin 
F = 65/137.67 = 0.472 
F-table value at 5% = 3.8853 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 145 
 
 
Interpretation:  The  F  calculate  value  is  0.47  which  is  less 
than the table value of 3.89 at 5% level with d.f. being v1 = 2 
and v2 = 12 and hence could have arisen due to chance. This 
analysis  supports  the  null  hypothesis  of  no  difference  in 
sample   means.   We   may,   therefore,   conclude   that   the 
difference  in  Chloride  content  in  river  for  three  seasons  is 
insignificant and is just a matter of chance.  
   

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 146 
 
CRITERIA FOR REJECTION OF AN OBSERVATION 
One  or  more  values  in  a  set  of  replicate  measurements  of  a 
physical  or  chemical  quantity  may  deviate  significantly  from 
the  majority  of  the  others.  In  such  a  circumstance,  there  is 
always  good  reason  to  exclude  the  outlying  numbers  from 
further  analysis  (for  example,  when  calculating  the  mean 
value or the standard deviation). Only questionable values that 
can  be  "legitimately"  labelled  as  outliers  are  eligible  for  this 
treatment. 
Outliers    are    observations    from    a    different    model    or 
distribution from   the   main   "body"   of   data.   Rejecting 
suspicious  observations  must  always  be  done  based  on  hard 
data  and  not  on  gut  feelings.  The  use  of  reliable  statistical 
tests  for  "outlier  detection"  is  one  method  for  accomplishing 
this.  
 
Q-test is  a  statistical  tool  used  to  identify  an  outlier  within  a 
data  set.  Dixon’s  Q  test,  is  a  way  to  find  outliers  in  very 
small, normally distributed, data sets.  
The rejection quotient is defined as the ratio of the divergence 
of  the  doubtful  value  from  its  nearest  neighbor  vwhen  the 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 147 
 
values are arranged in a sequence. If the value of Q is greater 
than  the  Q  value  given  in  the  table  at  the  desired  confidence 
level  for  a  given  number of  observations  the  suspect  value  is 
rejected.       
 
x1 is  the  smallest  (suspect)  value,  x2 is  the  second  smallest 
value, and xn is the largest value. 
Example:  Is  152  an  outlier  in  this  set  of  data?  Test  at  the 
95% confidence Level (i.e. at an alpha level of 5%). 
162, 166, 152, 174, 170, 165 
 
The Q test is applied as follows: 
Step  1:  Arrange  observations  in  ascending  or  descending 
order. 
152, 162, 165, 166, 170, 174 
 
Step 2: Insert the value in formula 
Q = (162 – 152) / 174 – 152 = 10/22 = 0.455. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 148 
 
 
Step 3:  Find the Q critical value in the Q table. For sample 6 
at 5% alpha level Q critical =0.625 
 
 
Step 4: Compare the Q statistic from Step 2 with the Q critical 
value in Step 3. If the Q statistic is greater than the Q critical 
value, the point is an outlier. 
Qstatistic =0.455. 
Qcritical value = 0.625. 
Solution:  0.455  is not greater  than  0.625,  so  this  point  is  not 
an outlier at an alpha level of 5%. 
REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
Regression   analysis   is   a   way   of   predicting   an   outcome 
variable  (Y  )  from  one  predictor  variable  (simple  regression) 
or  several  predictor  variables  (multiple  regression).  The  best-
fitting line is called a regression line. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 149 
 
Regression  analysis  is  used  to  estimate  the  relationship  that 
exists, on the average, between the dependent variable and the 
explanatory  variable.  It  also  determines  the  effect  of  each  of 
the    explanatory    variables    on    the    dependent    variable, 
controlling  the  effects  of  all  other  explanatory  variables. 
Further,  Predict  the  value  of  dependent  variable  for a  given 
value of the explanatory variable. 
Regression analysis aims to create a model describing a set of 
experimental  x  and  y  data  and  to  predict  unknown  x  values 
using  created  model.  This  generates  some  estimation  errors. 
For  a  given  set  of  data  there  may  be  a  large  number  of 
regression  models,  but  in  order  to  obtain  reliable  results,  the 
model showing the smallest deviation from experimental data 
should be chosen. 
 
Important Formulas: 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 150 
 
 
 
To determine the equation of the regression line for a sample 
of  data,  the  researcher  must  determine  the  values  for b0  and 
b1.  This  process  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  least  squares 
analysis. 
Least  squares  analysis is a  process  whereby  a  regression 
model  is  developed  by  producing  the  minimum  sum  of  the 
squared  error  values. Based  on  this  premise  and  calculus,  a 
particular  set  of  equations  has  been  developed  to  produce 
components of the regression model. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 151 
 
 
 
Examine  the  regression  line  fit  through  the  points  in  above 
Figure.  Observe  that  the  line  does  not  actually  pass through 
any of the points. The vertical distance from each point to the 
line is the error of the prediction. In theory, an infinite number 
of  lines  could  be  constructed  to  pass  through  these  points  in 
some   manner.   The   least   squares   regression   line   is   the 
regression  line  that  results  in  the  smallest  sum  of  errors 
squared. 
 
Problem  statement:  Formulate  regression  equation  for  the 
following data: 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 152 
 
S.No. X Y X
2 
XY 
1 29 69 841 2001 
2 35 95 1225 3325 
3 42 118 1764 4956 
4 50 125 2500 6250 
5 64 158 4096 10112 
 ΣX=220 ΣY=565 Σ X
2
=10426 ΣXY=26644 
 
Using these values, the researcher solved for the sample slope 
(b
1
) and the sample y-intercept (b
0
). 
 
SS
XY
 = ΣXY – (ΣX) (ΣY)/N = 26644 - (220) (565)/5 = 1784 
SS
XX
 = Σ X
2
 – (ΣX)
2
/N = 10426 – (220)
2
/5 = 746 
b
1 
= SS
XY 
/ SS
XX 
 = 2.39142 
b
0
 = ΣY/N - b
1
 (ΣX/N) = 113 - (2.39*44) = 7.77748 
 
The least squares equation of the regression line is 
ŷ = 2.39142X + 7.77748  

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 153 
 
 
 
 
SIGNIFICANT FIGURES 
The  number  of  significant  figures  in  a  result  is  simply  the 
number  of  figures  that  are  known  with  some  degree  of 
reliability.  The  number  of  significant  digits,  or  "significant 
figures," in a scientifically expressed coefficient of expression 
ranges  from  zero  to  nine.  How  confidently  or  precisely  an 
engineer  or  scientist  expresses  a  number  is shown  by  the 
number of significant figures included in the expression.  
Analytical  concentration   reports  need   a   sufficient  power-
resolution,   which   is   achieved   by   collecting   a   sufficient 
number  of  relevant  data  points.  The  number  of  significant 
digits   needed   can   be   calculated   using   several   different 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 154 
 
approaches  or  criteria.  In  most  cases,  three  key  figures  are 
sufficient. 
 
Accuracy refers  to  how  close  the  measured  value  is  to  the 
true of accepted value.  
Precision refers  to  how  close  the  measurements  are  to each 
other. 
 
 
To  determine  the  number  of  significant  figures  in  a  number 
use the following rules: 
  
Rule 1: Non-zero digits are always significant 
 
Example No. of 
significant digits 
2.4 2 
426 3 
389.32 5 
2419 4 
1236.47 6 
 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 155 
 
Here we can see any digit that is a non-zero digit is considered 
significant.  This  is  true  both  in  the  presence  or  absence  of  a 
decimal. 
 
Rule   2:   Any   zeros   between   two   significant   digits   are 
significant 
 
Example No. of 
significant digits 
4.02 3 
1025 4 
140079 6 
3209.3 5 
429.23004 8 
 
 
Rule  3:  Zeros  before  a  decimal  point  that  precede  non-
zero digits are not significant 
 
Example No. of 
significant digits 
001.02 3 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 156 
 
0031.256 5 
0425.4 4 
 
Rule  4: Zeros  to  the  right  of  a  decimal  after  a  non-zero 
number are significant 
  
Example No. of 
significant digits 
1.40 3 
0.007 1 
8.2000 5 
0.0040 2 
 
 
Significant Figures in Calculations 
• For addition and subtraction, the answer should have the 
same  number  of  decimal  places  as  the  term  with  the 
fewest decimal places. 
• For multiplication  and  division,  the  answer  should  have 
the  same  number  of  significant  figures  as  the  term  with 
the fewest number of significant figures. 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 157 
 
Addition   and   Subtraction. 21.753   +   3.48   +   2.25694   = 
27.48994 
 
• With   significant   figures   it   is 27.49 since 3.48 has   2 
decimal  places,  which  is  the  least  number  of  decimal 
places. 
Multiplication and Division. 57.837/0.36 = 160.658333 
• With   significant   figures,   the   final   value   should   be 
reported  as 1.6  x  10
2
 since 0.36 has  only  2  significant 
figures.    Notice that 160 would    be    ambiguous,    so 
scientific notation is necessary in this situation. 
Rules for Rounding off numbers 
If  the  digit  to  be  dropped  is  greater  than  5,  the  last  retained 
digit  is  increased  by  one.    Round  5.8475  to  4  significant 
figures: 5.8475 becomes 5.848.  
If  the  digit  to  be  dropped  is  less  than  5,  the  last  remaining 
digit   is   left   as   it   is.   Round   3.7464   to   4   significant 
figures: 3.7464 is 3.746.  
References: 

HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH METHODOLOGY                          ISBN: 978-93-94198-49-4 
  
SALIHA PUBLICATIONS Page 158 
 
Analysis of biochemical data. 
https://dspace.cvut.cz/bitstream/handle/10467/85627/F3-D-
2019-Anyz-Jiri-dizertace_anyz.pdf?sequence=-
1&isAllowed=y. 
https://faculty.washington.edu/heagerty/Books/Biostatistics/T
ABLES/t-Tables/. 
BIOSTATISTICS  A  Foundation  for  Analysis  in  the  Health 
Sciences.  
Black,   K.   (2019). Business   statistics:   for   contemporary 
decision making. John Wiley & Sons.