Guide for  
Preparation and Evaluation  
of Higher Degree Research Thesis
KWAME NKRUMAH UNIVERSITY OF  
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY  
KUMASI
JUNE 2016

2 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis

| 3 |
PREFACE
The thesis represents the main outcome of a student’s research and fulfils 
his/her scholarly aspiration. A good thesis should be clear and unambiguous 
and have a logical structure that should assist the reader to understand 
the discussion being presented but not obscure it. In order to achieve this 
objective, the layout of the thesis should conform to a set pattern. At the 
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), thesis is a 
requirement for the award of masters (MPhil, MSc, MA, LLM, MBA, MPA, MPH, 
M.Arch, MFA, etc) and Doctoral degrees. This Guide provides the graduate 
research student with most of the information needed to organise the thesis to 
meet the requirements of higher degree research (HDR). A thesis may be either 
print or non-print. The format for a print thesis can be either a typescript or a 
series of papers that have been published, have been submitted for publication 
and/or are manuscripts that could be submitted for publication.
This Guide is written to help the student and the supervisor(s) to communicate 
as required in scientific writing. Thus, the purpose of this Guide is to outline 
the format that a masters or a Doctoral thesis submitted to departments in 
KNUST and the School of Graduate Studies should follow. This guide begins 
with an introductory note on the types of HDR at KNUST followed by general 
regulations. The section on graduate thesis provides information on what is 
required of an HDR candidate.
Full details of the layout and style of a thesis are provided in this Guide. It is 
important to note the option given to HDR candidates to present the major 
(text) section of the thesis in the form of topical/thematic chapters (with 
specific objectives as sub-chapters). With this option, each chapter becomes 
a complete publishable paper/manuscript. It is strongly recommended that 
all supervisors and graduate students familiarise themselves with the general 
information and regulations in this Guide.

| 4 |
Table of Content
PREFACE                                                                                                        3
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                5
Thesis for a Doctoral Degree 5
Thesis for a Master of Philosophy Degree 5
Thesis for Taught Master Degree 6
CONTENTS                                                                                               6
A.  PRELIMINARY SECTION 7
1. Title Page 7
2. Intellectual Property Rights 7
3. Declaration of Authorship 7
4.  Abstract 8
5. Table of Contents 8
6. List of Tables 8
7. List of Figures 8
8. List of Abbreviations 9
9. Prefatory Material 9
B. MAJOR COMPONENTS OF THE THESIS 11
OPTION 1: THESIS AS A MONOGRAPH 12
OPTION 2: MANUSCRIPT-BASED THESIS 15
C. MINOR COMPONENTS OF THE THESIS (BACK MATTERS) 21
Bibliography or References or Works or Literature Cited 21
D. PUBLISHING FROM THESIS, AUTHORSHIP PROTOCOLS AND GUIDES 24
E. EVALUATION OF HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCH THESIS 26
F. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 27
G. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 28
H.  APPENDICES  31
Evaluation of MPhil Thesis 42

| 5 |
INTRODUCTION
The School of Graduate Studies is the main statutory body in the Kwame 
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST) that oversees 
graduate programmes offered by the Colleges, Faculties and Departments 
of the University. Individual departments also conduct workshops/forums/
colloquiums. These allow postgraduate students to discuss and present their 
work in a supportive environment with other higher degree research (HDR)
1
 
candidates and academics. These opportunities provide the HDR students with 
important feedback and support to facilitate the production of a high quality 
thesis. Students are advised to contact their departments or centres for more 
information.
Thesis for a Doctoral Degree
A Doctoral candidate is required to undertake original and significant 
research on an approved topic, the results of which are presented in a thesis. 
Candidates for the award of a Doctoral degree must demonstrate advanced 
theoretical and methodological knowledge. The research should make an 
original and significant contribution to knowledge or understanding.
As part of the training of a Doctoral candidate, a residency is required. This is to allow 
students to concentrate on their degrees, acquire the necessary habits, attitudes, skills 
and insights required for contribution to scholarship and have the opportunity to work 
closely with other scholars including Faculty and HDR students. The residency goals can 
be achieved by multiple means that include:
i. Presentation at scholarly seminars;
ii. Participation in scholarly seminars;
iii. Participation in conferences;
iv. Publications or other forms of scholarly dissemination; and
v. Passing other mandatory courses.
Thesis for a Master of Philosophy Degree
A research candidate for the degree of Master of Philosophy is required to 
undertake research on an approved topic, the results of which are presented 
in a thesis. Such candidates must demonstrate appropriate theoretical and 
1 HDR has been defined to include PhD, MPhil and all taught masters candidates.

6 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
methodological knowledge. The thesis must, therefore, contain ample evidence 
of the student’s familiarity with the research process. The scope of work in a 
Master degree by research is normally less than that undertaken in a Doctoral 
programme. A distinct contribution to knowledge is not mandatory in a thesis 
for the award of a Master of Philosophy.
Thesis for Taught Master Degree
A candidate enrolled in a taught Master programme is required to undertake 
research on an approved topic and present the results in a thesis. These 
candidates must demonstrate adequate methodological knowledge, although 
the expectation is normally lower in relation to Master of Philosophy 
candidates.
CONTENTS
The contents of this Guide are divided into three (3) main sections namely 
preliminary, major (text) and minor (back matters) sections. An additional 
section – mechanics of presentation – is included to ensure that quality work is 
produced.

| 7 |
A.  PRELIMINARY SECTION
1. Title Page
The first page identifies the work as a thesis being submitted to a department 
in the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi for the 
award of [NAME OF DEGREE]. The candidate’s name, qualifications held (not the 
qualification being sought), the full title of the thesis or other examinable work, 
and the month and year of submission are recorded on the title page.
The order of the candidate’s name is first name, middle name (if any) and 
surname. The candidate’s name should carry no prefixes such as Dr., Mr, Mrs. 
etc. A specimen of a title page is presented in Appendix 1.
2. Intellectual Property Rights
If there is any material in the thesis or other examinable work that could or 
does have implications for the intellectual property rights of the candidate, 
the University, a sponsor of the research or some other person or body, those 
implications shall be stated under the heading “Intellectual Property Rights” 
either on the same page as the Acknowledgments or on the next page in 
sequence.
3. Declaration of Authorship
On the first page after the table of contents, the certificate of authorship signed 
by the candidate certifying the original author of the thesis or other examinable 
work appears which states:
“I hereby declare that this submission is my own work and that, to the best 
of my knowledge and belief, it contains no material previously published or 
written by another person nor material which to a substantial extent has been 
accepted for the award of any other degree or diploma at Kwame Nkrumah 
University of Science and Technology, Kumasi or any other educational 
institution, except where due acknowledgment is made in the thesis.”
A specimen of a declaration page is presented in Appendix 2.

8 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
4.  Abstract
The thesis should contain one paragraph Abstract not exceeding 500 words 
(1 page) for a Doctoral thesis and 350 words (1 page) for a Master thesis. 
The Abstract is a short summary of the thesis and should start with a brief 
sentence to orientate readers about the overall issue addressed in the thesis.
The Abstract should indicate the main goal or objective of the study, its 
academic or practical importance, the methodology used, the main findings, 
the conclusion (that indicates the contributions made by the study in filling 
gaps in literature) and implications of the findings.
5. Table of Contents
All Doctoral or Master theses are required to have a Table of Contents. List the 
page number on which each section first appears. Use proper capitalisation and 
include headers and sectional titles exactly as they appear within the thesis. 
(For example, if “Chapter” is used in the text headers, it must appear in the 
Table of Contents).
6. List of Tables
A list of tables should be included on a separate page immediately following 
the Table of Contents and should follow the format below:
List of Tables
Table No.TitlePage
Table 2.1.National Population and its Urban Composition from 1960 – 201020
7. List of Figures
A list of figures should be included on a separate page immediately following 
the list of tables and should follow the format below:
List of Figures
Figure No.CaptionPage
Figure 2.1.Conceptualising Housing Affordability45

 9
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
8. List of Abbreviations
If a large number of abbreviations are used in the thesis, which may be unfamiliar to 
readers, an explanatory list should be provided. The abbreviations should be arranged in 
alphabetical order as presented below:
AMAAccra Metropolitan Assembly
APKAverage Passenger Kilometres
CBDCentral Business District
DVLADriver and Vehicle Licensing Authority
9. Prefatory Material
Prefatory materials are to be presented on separate pages in the thesis. 
These include the Acknowledgements, Ethical Approval, Professional Editorial 
Assistance and Confidential Material. Details of each of these requirements are 
presented in the sections below.
9.1.  Acknowledgments
Where appropriate, a brief acknowledgment of any substantial assistance received 
shall be included on a separate page. The acknowledgment should list the names of 
the people, organisations or institutions that provided substantial assistance for the 
research and the type of assistance, which may relate, for example to the:
• collection of data;
• processing of the data including the selection and use of particular 
statistical techniques;
• editing of the thesis;
• use of graphics in the thesis; and
• word processing of the thesis.
If any of the assistance was provided for a fee, this fact should also be 
recorded.
9.2. Ethical Approval
If the thesis or other examinable work reports on research involving humans or 
animals, a page containing the name(s) of the relevant University and/or other 
ethics committee and the approval number(s) shall be inserted in sequence in 
the soft-bound copies of the print thesis or other examinable print work.

10 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
9.3 Professional Editorial Assistance
If professional editorial assistance was obtained by the candidate during the 
conduct of the research and the production of the examinable work (and 
written permission granted before obtaining the assistance), the name of the 
editor and a brief description of the services provided must be specified in the 
thesis or any other examinable work under the heading “Professional Editorial 
Assistance” on a separate page inserted in sequence. If the professional 
editor’s current or former area of academic specialisation is similar to that of 
the candidate, this too should be stated in the prefatory matter of the thesis 
or other examinable work. Professional editing of a candidate’s thesis or other 
examinable work is limited to formatting, grammar and style and must not 
alter or improve the substantive content or conceptual organisation of the 
thesis. Where a professional editor provides advice to a candidate on matters 
of structure, exemplars only should be given.
9.5. Confidential Material
If there is any material in the thesis or other examinable work which is 
confidential for commercial or other reasons either for a specified period 
or indefinitely, the confidential material, the period and the reasons for its 
confidentiality shall be specified under the heading “Confidential Material” 
on a separate page inserted in sequence. In addition, the following statement 
shall appear on the cover of the soft-bound copies of the print thesis or other 
examinable print work: “This thesis contains confidential material as described 
on page [insert page number]. The thesis shall not be given to anyone who is 
not directly involved in the examination of the thesis [or portfolio].”
The Head of the Department from which the thesis originates is required to 
write a cover letter to indicate that the thesis contains confidential materials. 
Such a letter will inform the administration and prevent it from disseminating 
the thesis to the public.

Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
B. MAJOR COMPONENTS OF THE 
THESIS
The main text of the thesis is usually divided into chapters with sub-headings 
to indicate the orderly progression of topics and their relation to each other. All 
chapter headings should be typed consistently. When there are sub-headings, 
each level of heading should be clearly distinguished typographically from 
the other levels, and the variations should be selected so as to reflect, in an 
obvious way, the hierarchy of headings (that is, higher level headings should 
look more important). Always allow, at least, one extra line of space above and 
preferably below sub-headings. Students are expected to keep a maximum of 4 
levels for the sub-headings.
In this thesis format, the MAJOR (TEXT) SECTION should consist of the following 
chapters:
• Introduction – Why am I doing it? My aim (what do I hope to discover) 
and what is its significance?
• A Review of Research/Literature – What is known and unknown/identified 
gaps.
• Approach and Methodology – How am I going to achieve the aim?
• Results – What have I found?
• Discussions – What does it mean? The results should be related to 
literature.
• Conclusions – What are the possible applications or recommendations 
and what contributions does the thesis make to knowledge?
• References – What materials have been consulted in writing the thesis?
The School of Graduate Studies provides postgraduate students two options 
for the organisation of the main components of the thesis. The options are: 1) 
THESIS AS A MONOGRAPH and 2) MANUSCRIPT-BASED THESIS. The choice of an 
option is based on the department’s tradition, subject area, methods used, and 
requirements of research project that the student or supervisor has. Details of 
these options are presented in the following section of the Guide.

12 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
OPTION 1: THESIS AS A MONOGRAPH
Chapter 1: General Introduction
The thesis should normally begin with a general introduction, which presents 
an overview of the purpose and significance of the study. The introduction 
should show why the topic selected is worth investigating. This will normally 
be done with reference to the existing research knowledge, identifying areas 
that have not been explored and the gaps that need to be explored or filled by 
the investigation or where new research findings justify a reconsideration of 
established knowledge.
The research problem(s) that need(s) solving or investigating should be 
correctly and precisely defined. The research problem(s) can be stated in 
question form, with sub-questions, if possible. The general introduction should 
propose a solution to this problem. This response should make explicit the 
objective of the research, and not simply state an intention to explore or 
discuss. The study should be based on a well-defined hypothesis, which should 
be clearly stated.
How the research makes an original contribution to the theoretical body of 
knowledge and also the study’s practical significance should be mentioned. 
It is especially critical that the Introduction be well-written. A clearly defined 
purpose and a strong theoretical grounding fundamentally strengthen the 
thesis. They direct the reader from the advanced knowledge level towards the 
definite question the student is addressing. Without a clearly defined problem 
and a strong theoretical grounding, the thesis is fundamentally flawed from the 
outset.
The general introduction should be interesting and must tell the direction of 
the research. The central concept underlying the work – conceptual framework 
– should be described, making it a “theme’’ that ties together all the arguments 
of the student. Theoretical assumptions of the study should be provided 
with a discussion of the limitations they impose. The expected outcome as 
a prelude to the solution of the problem(s), the need for the research and 
the beneficiaries should be well-addressed. This chapter should be brief, 
well-developed and unambiguously written to cover one or two pages. It 
should end with the specific objectives, which would constitute the various 
unique research chapters. In some departments in the University, the first 
chapter covers sub-headings such as justification of the research, scope of the 
research, summary of methodology, limitations of the study and organisation of 
the thesis. These sub-headings could be maintained while following OPTION 1.

 13
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Chapter 2: Literature Review
It is called Literature Review because the contents of this chapter should 
be based on most relevant and latest information/literature relating to the 
field of study. The purpose is to summarise, evaluate and compare the main 
developments and current discussions in the field, which are specifically 
relevant to the subject of research embodied in the thesis. It should also aim at 
identifying ways to address these issues with the present research programme.
Every statement that goes beyond basic textbook or electronic knowledge 
needs to be supported by an appropriate reference. The literature review 
should recap, appraise and match the major changes in the related field to the 
research subject that would form the thesis. Key papers should be identified 
instead of quoting from those that only contribute to the student’s field of 
study in a minor way. Those not read should not be quoted. The number of 
relevant papers to include is a matter of judgement depending on the field.
Students should avoid plagiarism (see Section 21 – “Plagiarism Test for Theses” 
of the Graduate Handbook) which occurs when a writer uses words, phrases 
or passages from someone else’s work and presents them verbatim as his/her 
own without providing complete documentation or source of citation. A student 
could be guilty of plagiarism if he/she copies a whole paragraph from a writer 
despite acknowledging the source. It is a serious and punishable offense in 
research project reporting. Sanctions could include, but not limited to penalties, 
suspension, and even expulsion from the university. Certificates of students 
shall be revoked if this is detected and proven after the student has graduated 
from the university. Research students, therefore, need to develop and respect 
ethical values including the unacceptability of plagiarism and falsifying results 
to make them appear more satisfactory.
All aspects that lead to the work must be integrated without losing sight of the 
focus. For example, candidates can incorporate one or two relevant schemes 
and diagrams in the literature review. However, one should avoid expansion 
into topics that are not directly related to the research. Similarly, one should 
not reproduce textbook pictures, proofs, derivations, etc. without sources 
of citation. Concepts crucial for the proper understanding and appreciation 
of the questions addressed, the techniques applied, and the results obtained 
should be clearly explained. The literature review thus describes and analyses 
previous research on the topic and should not merely string together what 
other researchers have found. One should state the origin of the problem, 
what is already known about it, and the other methods applied to solve it. 
When gaps are identified, they should be discussed and the body of knowledge 

14 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
analysed to determine what is known and not known about the topic. What is 
not known should inform the objectives of the study.
It is paramount to stress that the theoretical framework or conceptual 
framework that guides the study should be made an essential part of the 
literature review. Please, refer to Appendix 3 to clarify the differences between 
Theoretical Framework and Conceptual Framework.
Chapter 3: Approach and Methodology
This chapter outlines the design adopted for the study, explains the methods 
employed to select the sample, discusses the tools used to collect quantitative 
and / or qualitative data, and traces the steps taken to screen, combine, and 
reduce the quantitative data in preparation for a testing and validation of the 
theoretical model.
Chapter 4: Results and Discussion
The data analysis section is one of the most essential sections of a research 
work. It consists of the data that have been collected as a part of the research 
and the researcher’s analysis of the data. Presenting the data collected and its 
analysis in comprehensive and easy to understand manner is the key to have 
a good analysis section. The data should be procedurally analysed in line and 
build-up to the objectives for which the study is being undertaken. The analysis 
should be in an appropriate format and detailed enough to address the 
researcher objectives. Quantitative data could be presented in tables, charts, 
figures, etc. and should be explained and discussed in the context of the study. 
The results from the analysis should be related to real life situations and in 
case of negative results, it is important to provide some level of justification to 
such situations.
The discussion section needs to review the findings from the analysis in the 
context of the literature and the existing knowledge about the subject. The 
discussion section, therefore, needs to follow from the results and relate back 
to the literature review. Typically HDR thesis contains specific objectives that 
can stand alone as chapters. Where a HDR student devotes a separate chapter 
on analysis and discussion to each objective, chapter four can be written as 
follows:
Chapter 4.1. Heading that reflects the first objective
Chapter 4.2. Heading that reflects the second objectives
Chapter 4.3. Heading the reflects the third objectives

 15
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
The number of sub-chapters under chapter four depends on the number of 
specific objectives in the study.
Chapter 5: General Discussion
The general discussion/synthesis should contribute to the understanding of 
the whole study/experiment and the results obtained from the sub-chapters. 
The chapter should contain the latest available papers or relevant knowledge 
available at the time of the student’s results/work. Such facts need to be 
mentioned and compared to the findings. Students are expected to draw 
implications of the entire study along the lines of the research questions or 
specific objectives set at the beginning of the thesis. In addition, the novelty 
of the work should be stressed in addition to the contribution/significance and 
implications of the findings. For example, have the objectives been achieved 
and have the hypotheses or research questions been answered?
Chapter 6: Conclusions and Recommendations
i. Use few sentences to summarise the most important results and 
conclude by giving the strongest and most important statement that 
highlights the outcome of the study. It should be reasonably short.
ii. The student might find it helpful to put the conclusions in the form of 
points.
iii. The student should provide answers/solutions to the questions/
problems raised in the introduction.
iv. State how the research findings and results would contribute to the 
field in general and what broader or general implications (practical or 
otherwise) these may have. Summarise what was learned and how it 
can be applied.
v. Describe variations, extensions or other applications of the central idea.
vi. Are there ways in which the student’s work could be improved by future 
researchers?
vii. Suggestions may be made for further research or work.
OPTION 2: MANUSCRIPT-BASED THESIS
Chapters 1 and 2 in a manuscript-based thesis follow the same format as has 
been described under OPTION 1.

16 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Chapter 3: Topical or Thematic Chapters
These parts of the major (text) section should be divided into logical sub-chapters, each 
containing the data obtained for each specific objective or theme during the research. 
Each topical or thematic chapter comprises
1.    heading;
2. brief introduction;
3. approach and methods;
4. results and interpretation; and
5. discussion (or results/discussion)
NB: Each chapter then becomes a complete publishable paper/manuscript.
Chapter 3.1 Topical or Thematic Chapter One
Heading
i. Should focus on each specific objective; and
ii. Should be concise and properly couched to reflect what the chapter (i.e., 
specific objective) entails.
3.1.1 Introduction
i. An overview of the problem and a statement of the hypothesis or 
specific question to be explored.
ii. Why is this part of the problem worth studying/investigating?
iii. Relevance of this in contributing to solving the problem(s) prescribed or 
identified in the main objective.
iv. The introduction should also highlight the “gaps” that need to be filled. 
These gaps are areas not fully explored in the thematic area.
v. Use some recently published material or existing research on the topic 
to evaluate the information regarding the developmental issues in the 
subject area and the potential original contribution to the theoretical 
body of knowledge to be made.
vi. A conceptual model may be used to provide an answer to the question 
posed in the introduction (at a conceptual level).
vii. Ensure that the introduction is not alienated from the general 
introduction (Chapter 1) but try to avoid unnecessary repetitions.

 17
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
3.1.2 Approach and Methodology
i. This area describes and justifies the data-gathering method used, its 
appropriateness and outlines how the data would be analysed.
ii. The method should be clearly and meticulously described, exactly 
reproducible, detailed and purposeful to generate accurate results or 
sufficient data.
iii. Candidates should check methods adopted in previous theses or sources 
before they use them.
iv. Follow the description of the Research Design detailing every step of the 
data-gathering and analysis processes.
v.  Reference  literature  about  Method:  Citation  should  be  limited  
to  data  sources  and  references  of  where  to  find  more  complete  
description of procedure.
vi. Detailed description of design, experiment or survey.
vii.   Measurements   and   operational   definitions:   Include   detailed   
discussions of indexes and scales. Specify methods used to assess 
validity and reliability.
viii.   Analysis:   Techniques   to   be   used   and   justification.   Nature   of   
relationships  expected  –    asymmetrical,  symmetrical,  reciprocal,  
linear, monotonic, other curvilinear, necessary, etc.
ix. Description of data analysis: Description of statistical analysis and 
tests  performed  to  be  given;  identification  of  themes/categories  
(qualitative or historical research).
x. Tests of hypotheses: ANOVAs, cross-tabulations, correlations, etc, 
depending on techniques used should be given in the same order 
as hypotheses.
3.1.3 Results and Interpretation
i.  Data  need  be  interpreted  thoroughly  for  the  solution  of  each  
problem.
ii. Results section is reserved for the description of the experimental 
data and should not contain extensive interpretation.

18 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
iii.  Describe  the  results  of  experiments  that  provide  evidence  in  
support  of  the  thesis:  Make  actual  statements  of  observation,  
including statistics, tables and graphs or figures.
iv. Mention negative and positive results.
v. Use SI units throughout thesis.
vi. Break up results into logical segments by using subheadings.
vii. Key results should be given in clear sentences.
viii. Do not repeat in the text all the values given in tables.
ix. Tables and/or figures should be used to illustrate and summarise 
all numeric information.
x. Do not present the same data in a graph/figure as well as in a table.
xi.     Findings should  address  results  from  data  analysis  and  results  of  
the tests of the hypotheses.
xii. Use error bars if possible.
3.1.4 Discussion
i. Interpret results in terms of background spelt out in the Introduction.
ii. Break up the section into logical segments by using subheadings.
iii. Include the evidence of line of reasoning supporting each interpretation.
iv. Discuss the observations in relation to the critical body of knowledge on 
the topic.
v. Identify all papers that report data related to the findings, and discuss 
them appropriately. It is the purpose of the discussion to evaluate and 
interpret the results against the background of the relevant literature.
vi. Appropriate review of the relevant literature: Compare the novelty in the 
findings with what is confirmatory (or contradictory) to published work.
vii. Do not just reiterate what is found but rather discuss what the findings 
mean in relation to the theoretical body of knowledge on the topic and 
your profession.
viii. Begin by discussing your findings in relation to the theoretical 
framework introduced in the Literature Review.

 19
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
ix. Address what the findings mean for communication professionals in that 
field – the practical and pedagogical implications of the study.
• Do  not  write  lengthy  discussion:  avoid  repetitions  of  the  data.  
Instead interpret them;
•  Address  the  theoretical  and  the  practical  implications  of  the  
findings;
• Present only interpretations of the findings, not opinion; and
•  Outline  the  limitation  of  the  study,  and  propose  areas  for  future  
research.
x. The thesis should end with a brief conclusion that provides closure.
NOTE: In Departments where students present results and discussion together, 
subsection 3.1.3 would be written as follows:
3.1.3 Results and Discussion
i. In most cases, results and discussion go together.
ii. This is when the thesis is lengthy with several pages of results that 
would make it difficult for the reader to remember the results before the 
discussion.
iii. However, care should be taken to describe the conditions obtained for 
each set of results and how they fit into the existing body of knowledge 
whether they are together or not.
iv. Are the results consistent with current theories? Do they give new 
insights? Do they suggest new theories or mechanisms?
v. Ensure that appropriate statistical analyses have been used.
vi. Use appropriate statistical tests. Where applicable, show measurement 
errors and standard errors on the graphs.
vii. Show how other people in the field appreciate the findings. Do the 
findings have any implications that do not relate to the questions that 
you set out to answer?
Chapters 3.2 – 3.x: Other Topical/Thematic Chapters
These should be written by following the format described in 3.1 above.

20 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Chapter 4: General Discussion
The general discussion/synthesis should contribute to the understanding of the 
whole study or experiment and the results obtained from the sub-chapters. 
The chapter should contain the latest available papers or relevant knowledge 
available at the time of the student’s work. Such facts need to be mentioned 
and compared to the findings. Students are expected to draw implications of 
the entire study along the lines of the research questions or specific objectives 
set at the beginning of the thesis. In addition, the novelty of the work should 
be stressed in addition to the contribution/significance and implications of the 
findings. For example, have the objectives, hypotheses or research questions 
been achieved or answered?
Chapter 5: Conclusions and Recommendations
i. Use few sentences to summarise the most important results and 
conclude by giving the strongest and most important statement that 
highlights the outcome of the study. It should be reasonably short.
ii. The student might find it helpful to put the conclusions in the form of 
points.
iii. The chapter should provide answers or solutions to the questions or 
problems raised in the Introduction.
iv. State how the research findings and results would contribute to the field 
in general and what sort of broader or general implications (practical or 
otherwise) these may have. Summarise what was learned and how it 
can be applied.
v. Describe variations, extensions or other applications of the central idea.
vi. Are there ways in which the student’s work could be improved by future 
researchers?
vii. Suggestions may be made for further research or work.

| 21 |
C. MINOR COMPONENTS OF THE 
THESIS (BACK MATTERS)
Bibliography or References or Works or Literature Cited
Referencing is done in order to demonstrate the evidence and research 
that you have undertaken to complete and support your ideas and to give 
appropriate credit to those sources and authors. In addition, it enables readers 
to consult the same materials that you have used. In view of this, a list of 
all references shall be provided. The list of references that will be indicated 
at the end will list alphabetically the sources acknowledged. The Harvard 
Style of referencing shall be used. This guide acknowledges that there are 
many adapted forms of the Harvard referencing style (e.g. Format 7, Harvard 
Educational Review, Elsevier Harvard with titles, Elsevier Harvard without titles, 
etc). The rule-of-thumb is that when using the Harvard referencing style, the 
candidate must be consistent. The references below provide a general overview 
of the Harvard referencing style.
Author: Contribution/Chapter in a Book
Bibliography example: Quagraine, V. (2011). Kumasi as a Garden City, In: K. 
K. Adarkwa (ed.), The future of the tree: Towards growth and development of 
Kumasi (pp. 14-34), Kumasi, Ghana: KNUST Printing Press.
In-text example: (Quagraine, 2014) or As noted by Quagraine (2014)...
Book (1 author)
Bibliography example: Adarkwa, K. K. (2011). Future of the Tree: Towards Growth 
and 
Development of Kumasi. KNUST, Kumasi: University Printing Press (UPK).
In-text examples: (Adarkwa, 2011) or Adarkwa (2011) commented that...
Book (2 authors)
Duah, D. Y. and Amos-Abanye, S. (2015). The Urban Poor and the Excesses of 
Rents: Evidence from Kumasi, Ghana. Kumasi: University Printing Press (UPK).
In-text examples: (Duah and Amos-Abanye, 2015) or Duah and Amos-Abanye 
(2015) commented that...

22 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Book (3 authors)
Poku-Boansi, M., Duah, D. Y. and Amos-Abanye, S. (2015). The Urban Poor 
and the Excesses of Rents: Evidence from Kumasi, Ghana. Kumasi: University 
Printing Press (UPK).
In-text examples: (Poku-Boansi et al., 2015) or as noted by Poku-Boansi et al. 
(2015)
Book or Journal (multiple works by an author in the same year)
Bibliography example:
Cobbinah, P. B., Erdiaw-Kwasie, M. O., and Amoateng, P. (2015a). Rethinking 
sustainable development within the framework of poverty and urbanisation 
in developing countries. Environmental Development, 13, 18-32. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.envdev.2014.11.001
Cobbinah, P. B., Erdiaw-Kwasie, M. O. and Amoateng, P. (2015b). Africa’s 
urbanisation: implications for sustainable development. Cities, 47, 62-72. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2015.03.013
In-text example:
(Cobbinah et al., 2015a)
(Cobbinah et al., 2015b)
Cobbinah et al. (2015a) commented that...
Cobbinah et al. (2015b) indicated that...
Conference Papers
Bibliography example: Adarkwa, K. K. and Poku-Boansi, M. (2011).
 
Climate 
Change, Food Security, and Poverty in Ghana’s Northern Regions – Policy 
Implications for Local Governments. Paper presented at the Senior Policy 
Seminar Towards a Green Economy: The Effects of Climate Change on Food 
Security and Earth Resources in Africa and Asia, Vietnam, September 21-24, 
2011.
In-text example: (Adarkwa and Poku-Boansi, 2011) or Adarkwa and Poku-Boansi 
(2011) noted that......
Journal article (printed journal article)
Bibliography examples: Poku-Boansi, M. and Adarkwa, K. K. (2013). The 
determinants of demand for public transport services in Kumasi, Ghana. Journal 
of Science and Technology, 33 (3), pp.....

 23
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
In-text example: (Poku-Boansi and Adarkwa, 2013) or According to Poku-Boansi 
and Adarkwa (2013), .....
Journal article (online/electronic journal article)
Bibliography example:
Cobbinah, P. B., Erdiaw-Kwasie, M. O. and Amoateng, P. (2015). Africa’s 
urbanisation: implications for sustainable development. Cities, 47, 62-72. 
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2015.03.013. [Accessed 30/07/2015]
In-text example: (Cobbinah et al. 2015) or According to Cobbinah et al. (2015)....
Maps
Bibliography example: Town and Country Planning Department (2014). 
Infrastructure Map of Kumasi, Scale two hundred and fifty kilometres to one 
feet. Kumasi: Infrastructure Survey.
In-text example: (Town and Country Planning Department, 2014) or As can 
be seen in the Infrastructure Map of Kumasi (Town and Country Planning 
Department, 2014)
Newspaper article (printed article)
Bibliography example: Tamakloe, E. K. A. (2008)......... Daily Graphic. 26
th
 February.
In-text Example: (Tamakloe, 2008) or Tamakloe’s (2008) article indicates that...
Newspaper article (online / electronic article)
Bibliography example: Tamakloe, E. K. A. (2008)........... Daily Graphic. [online] 
26th February. p.14. Available from: http://www.dailygraphiconline.com/gh. 
[Accessed: 22nd May 2008].
In-text Example: (Tamakloe, 2008) or Tamakloe’s (2008) article indicates that...
Newspaper article (no author)
Bibliography example: Daily Graphic. (2008). The rains are here again. Nov 24th.
In-text example: (Daily Graphic, 2008) or Daily Graphic (2008) article indicates 
that...

| 24 |
D. PUBLISHING FROM THESIS, 
AUTHORSHIP PROTOCOLS AND 
GUIDES
It is generally expected that HDR students seek to publish results from their 
research in academic journals. Supervisors will normally mentor them through 
this process as there is a lot to learn. One decision that a candidate will need 
to make early in his/her candidature is whether to try to publish as he/she 
goes on or wait until completion before he/she starts to publish. There are 
advantages and disadvantages for both choices and the candidate’s supervisors 
will help him/her in making this decision. In view of this, it is recommended 
that the candidate begins the publication process before completing the draft 
thesis. This is because the candidate will be expected to show evidence of this 
during the examination of the thesis (see Graduation Requirements in Section 
12 of Graduate School Handbook).
In considering publishing from the thesis, decisions must be made about 
attribution of authorship. The issue that arises is whether the candidate is 
the sole author of any resulting publications or the authorship should be 
jointly attributed to supervisors or others. It is, therefore, important that HDR 
candidates and supervisors agree on authorship of a publication at an early 
stage in the research project and review their decisions periodically.
Attribution of authorship depends, to some extent, on the discipline, but in all 
cases, authorship must be based on substantial contributions in a combination 
of:
i. conception and design of the project;
ii. analysis and interpretation of research data; and
iii. drafting significant parts of the work or critically revising it so as to 
contribute to the interpretation.
Authorship should, therefore, not be offered to those who do not meet the 
requirements set out above. For example, none of the following contributions, 
in and of themselves, justifies including a person as a co-author:
i. being Head of Department or holding other positions of authority or 
personal friendship with the HDR candidate;

 25
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
ii. providing a technical contribution but no other intellectual input to the 
project or publication;
iii. providing routine assistance in some aspects of the project as the 
acquisition of funding or general supervision of the research team;
iv. providing data that has already been published or materials obtained 
from third parties, but with no other intellectual input.
A HDR candidate should be the principal author of publications emerging 
from a thesis with supervisors, where appropriate, taking first author status. 
It is a courtesy if the supervisor designates the general area or substantially 
contributes to design. It is not acceptable if the supervisor only provides 
encouragement, physical resources, financial support, critiques or editorial 
contribution. In the last case, supervisors should be acknowledged in the 
acknowledgments section. There are some circumstances where the supervisor 
may be the principal author but where this occurs it must be with the HDR 
candidate’s written approval. If research supervisors use contracts with their 
HDR candidates it would be appropriate to include a statement of authorship.
“Details on Publishing from a Student’s Thesis, Authorship Protocols and 
Guides” can be seen in Publication Policy of the School of Graduate Studies, 
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi.

| 26 |
E. EVALUATION OF HIGHER DEGREE 
RESEARCH THESIS
The following shall be considered in the assessment of a Higher Degree Research 
candidate’s thesis:
1. Statement of the problem and justification for the study;
2. Critical review of literature and theoretical and conceptual frameworks/
modelling techniques;
3. Approach and methodology;
4. Analysis of data and presentation of results;
5. Statement of main findings and discussion;
6. Conclusions and recommendations; and
7.    Presentation.
The oral examination of a Higher Degree Research candidate shall also be based on the 
following:
1. Presentation by PowerPoint;
2. Understanding of subject matter during presentation; and
3. Response to questions.
Details of the criteria for the evaluation of the thesis and oral examination of a 
Higher Degree Research candidate are given in Appendix 4 of this guide.

| 27 |
F. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
The School of Graduate Studies expects HDR Students to meet some basic 
requirements prior to graduation. Details of these requirements have been 
presented extensively in Section 12 of the Graduate School Handbook. HDR 
students are advised to refer to the Handbook for details.

| 28 |
G. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Margins and Text Spacing
The thesis submitted to the Board of Graduate School should normally be 
double-sided, with the pages numbered consecutively. The margins are to be: 
2.5 cm with the gutter margin, 4 cm. Text is spaced one-and-a-half with the 
exception of the abstract, quotations, footnotes, references, table and figure 
captions, which are to be single spaced.
Font Type, Size and Style
The print thesis or other examinable print work needs to be word processed 
or a typescript paper document (A4 size paper (21.0 x 29.7 cm)) with the text 
in a consistent font throughout (Times New Roman font - 12 point) and any 
footnotes in a smaller font. It should not be submitted in an electronic format.
Captions/Legends for Tables and Figures
Captions for tables should be numbered and set above the table to reflect the 
content of the table. In the case of figures, the captions should be related to 
the contents and set below the figure. Numbering for the tables and figures 
should be linked to the chapters, i.e. numbers for the tables and figures should 
begin with the number of the chapter within which it is found.
Photographs
Photographs or pictures that have been prepared in the study and are 
presented in the thesis should be captioned as plates and numbered 
appropriately as in the case of figures.
Pagination
All pages must be numbered consecutively. Each chapter/section should begin 
on a separate page. The School of Graduate Studies requires that page numbers 
be centred two lines below the bottom margin.
i. Title page
On the title page, the page number is omitted, though it is considered as page 
“i”.

 29
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
ii. Front Matter (Preliminary Pages)
Preliminary pages are numbered with lower case Roman numerals, beginning 
with (ii) following the title page centred at the bottom. On the title page, the 
page number is omitted, though it is considered as page (i).
iii. Text (Main Body) and Back Matter
Arabic numerals are used for all pages in the main text and back matter. The 
main body of the thesis begins with Arabic numeral “1”, “2”, “3” etc centred at 
the bottom of the page. The Arabic numeral on a new page starting a chapter/
section is placed in the centre at the bottom. This includes the first page of 
each back matter, chapter/section (i.e., appendices, endnotes, etc.).
iv. References and Other Matter
Pagination for the references and other materials is by Arabic numerals.
Length of Thesis/Word Limits of Thesis
The Board of the Graduate School has set a limit for HDR thesis and they are presented 
as follows:
i. The maximum length of a Doctoral thesis shall be between 60,000 
and 100,000 words inclusive of footnotes, appendices, other than 
documentary or statistical appendices and bibliography.
ii. The maximum length of a Master of Philosophy thesis shall not 
exceed 60,000 words inclusive of footnotes, appendices, other than 
documentary or statistical appendices and bibliography.
Binding of thesis for Assessment
A thesis ready for submission to assessors should be paper (comb) bound and 
submitted according to the following:
i. For a Doctoral degree thesis, five (5) copies should be submitted.
ii. For a Master degree thesis, three (3) copies should be submitted.
Copies for final submission
After the thesis has been approved, it must be bound in standard form Art 
vellum or cloth; overcast, edges uncut. A hard copy of a thesis that has been 
accepted for the award of either a Master or Doctoral degree shall be sent 
to the School of Graduate Studies. A PDF version of the final thesis shall be 
submitted along with the hardcopies to the School of Graduate Studies.

30 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Labelling of Final Hard Copy
i. Front Cover
The front cover of the final copy should be lettered boldly (0.5 cm to 1.25 cm) 
with the Title, Author and Date (Month and Year).
ii. Spine
The spine of the thesis should be lettered boldly up back (0.5 cm to 1.25cm) 
with the degree, year, and name, before the award of the degree is published 
by the Registrar.
Binding Colour
The colour scheme for a Master thesis shall be deep blue while that for 
Doctoral degrees shall be wine.
Paragraphing
Every paragraph in the thesis should have at least three sentences and each 
of them should develop one main idea and have a topic sentence which 
expresses this idea. The text should be fully “justified”.

| 31 |
H.  APPENDICES
The appendix comprises materials considered necessary for the comprehension of 
the text but which would otherwise disturb the flow of the text or bore the reader 
unbearably. Some things that are typically included in the appendix are:
i. important and original computer programmes;
ii. data files that are too large to be represented simply in the main text; 
and
iii. pictures, maps or diagrams of results which are not important enough to 
form a part of the main text.

32 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Appendix 1 – Specimen Thesis Title Page
THE IMPACT OF GHANA’S OIL DISCOVERY ON LAND 
USE IN SEKONDI – TAKORADI
By 
Samuel Kofi Duah 
(B.Sc. Planning; MPhil Planning)
A thesis submitted to the Department of Planning, Kwame 
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the award degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN PLANNING
June, 2016

 33
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Appendix 2 –Specimen Declaration Page
I hereby declare that this submission is my own work and that, to the best 
of my knowledge and belief, it contains no material previously published 
or written by another person nor material which to a substantial extent has 
been accepted for the award of any other degree or diploma at Kwame 
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi or any other 
educational institution, except where due acknowledgment is made in 
the thesis.
.........................................................................
Name of Student Name and IDSignatureDate
Certified by:
............................................................................
Name of SupervisorSignatureDate
Certified by:
............................................................................
Name of Head of DepartmentSignatureDate

34 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Appendix 3: Clarifying the differences between 
Theoretical and Conceptual Framework
In attempting to distinguish between a conceptual and theoretical framework, a 
few key terms ought to be defined.
A theoretical framework refers to the theory that a researcher chooses to guide 
him/her in his/her research. Thus, a theoretical framework is the application 
of a theory, or a set of concepts drawn from one and the same theory, to offer 
an explanation of an event, or shed some light on a particular phenomenon or 
research problem. This could refer to, for instance, the Set theory, evolution, 
quantum mechanics, particulate theory of matter, or similar pre-existing 
generalisation that could be applied to a given research problem, deductively.
On the other hand, a researcher may opine that his/her research problem 
cannot meaningfully be researched in reference to only one theory, or 
concepts resident within one theory. In such cases, the researcher may have 
to “synthesize” the existing views in the literature concerning a given situation 
– both theoretical and from empirical findings. The synthesis may be called a 
model or conceptual framework, which essentially represents an ‘integrated’ 
way of looking at the problem (Liehr and Smith 1999). Such a model could then 
be used in place of a theoretical framework.  Thus, a conceptual framework 
may be defined as an end result of bringing together a number of related 
concepts to explain or predict a given event, or give a broader understanding 
of the phenomenon of interest – or simply, of a research problem. The process 
of arriving at a conceptual framework is akin to an inductive process whereby 
small individual pieces (in this case, concepts) are joined together to tell a 
bigger map of possible relationships.
In conclusion, the conceptual framework is something you can develop yourself 
based on a particular theory. You inevitably would use some -if not all-concept 
that this particular theory operates with. In addition, in your conceptual 
framework you can add your own concept or constructs or variables that you 
think are relevant and then proceed to explore or test the relationship between 
them.
Conceptual Framework Theoretical framework
GenesisCreated from a variety of 
conceptual and theoretical 
perspectives
Evolve from literature review / 
adapted from existing theory
Conceptual 
Meaning
Synthesis of relevant conceptsApplication of a theory as a 
whole or in part

 35
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Conceptual Framework Theoretical framework
Process Underline 
Review of Literature
Inductive – many aspects 
of different theoretical 
perspectives are brought 
together
Deductive – use dominantly in 
natural science
Methodological 
Approach
Located in both quantitative 
and qualitative paradigms
Located mainly in the 
quantitative research paradigm
School of 
Application
Limited to specific research 
problem and / or context
Wider application beyond the 
current research problem and 
context
Research BaseSocial Science / Management 
based research
Natural Sciences based 
research
Source: Imenda, 2014.
Further reading:
Imenda, S. (2014). Is There a Conceptual Difference between Theoretical and 
Conceptual Frameworks? J Soc Sci, 38(2): 185-195.
Liehr, P. and Smith M.J. (1999). Middle range theory: Spinning research and 
practice to create knowledge for the new millennium. Advances in 
Nursing Science, 21(4): 81-91.

36 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Appendix 4 – Evaluation of Thesis
A thesis will be assessed based on the numerical marks and grades in 
Appendix 4.1.
Appendix 4.1. Evaluation of Doctoral Thesis
Numeric Marks (%)GradeInterpretation
70 – 100AExcellent
60 – 69BVery Good
55 – 59CGood
50 – 54EReferred*
Below 50FFail
*A referred thesis means the affected candidate has the opportunity to review 
the thesis for re-assessment. However, the re-assessment of a referred thesis 
should not be scored more than 60.
The detailed criteria to be used for the evaluation of a Doctoral thesis are 
outlined in Appendix 4.2.
Appendix 4.2. Detailed Criteria, Marks and Guidelines for Assessment of 
Doctoral Thesis
CriteriaMarksGuidelines for assessment
1. Statement of the Problem and 
Justification for the Study
a. Ability to articulate or explain 
the import of the topic and its 
implications (5 marks).
b. Justification: An explanation of 
why the topic merits a study 
in local and/or international 
perspectives (5 marks).
c. Statement of Research Questions, 
Objectives and Hypotheses/
Propositions (Where necessary) (5 
marks).
15
• A candidate scores very high 
marks in each section of the 
detailed criteria if he/she 
demonstrates a high level of 
competence in all the listed 
areas plus any integral aspects 
that the examiner deems 
necessary.

 37
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
CriteriaMarksGuidelines for assessment
2. Critical Review of Literature 
and Theoretical and Conceptual 
Frameworks/Modelling Techniques
a. Candidate’s demonstration of 
evidence of scholarly analysis, 
and criticism of research relevant 
to the topic/problem being 
investigated (4 marks).
b. Meticulous citation of relevant 
scholarly work by quotation, 
paraphrasing and/or commentary 
(4 marks).
c. Demonstration of competence in 
understanding and evaluating the 
material (4 marks).
d. Candidate drawing differences and 
similarities between the thesis 
and previous investigations and 
identifying knowledge gaps (4 
marks).
e. Candidate developing robust 
conceptual/theoretical 
frameworks/modelling techniques 
and justifying references from the 
literature (4 marks).
20
• A candidate scores close to 
75% of the total marks if he 
demonstrates high level of 
competence in 75% of listed 
criteria plus any integral the 
examiner deems fit.
• A candidate scores half of 
the marks allocated if s/he 
demonstrates high level of 
competence in 50% of the 
details listed plus any integral 
that the examiner deems fit.
• A candidate scores less than 
half of the allocated marks if 
s/he demonstrates high level 
of competence in less than 
50% of the criteria plus any 
integral that the examiner 
deems fit.
3. Approach and Methodology
a. Statement of the design or 
blueprint for the study: Whether 
qualitative, quantitative, mixed 
and whether cross-sectional in the 
collection mode, with justification 
(5 marks).
b. Sampling Procedures: 
Determination of sample size, 
sample frames, techniques with 
justification (5 marks).

38 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
CriteriaMarksGuidelines for assessment
c. Data collection techniques/tools, 
processes in the field and data 
analysis framework (5 marks).
NB: The methodology must:
i. draw links with the theoretical/
conceptual framework.
ii. state the research philosophy 
such as empiricism, pragmatism, 
positivism, etc.
15
4. Analysis of Data and Presentation of 
Results
a. Use of appropriate methods and 
techniques to analyse the data 
(7.5 marks).
b. Accurate (i.e. reliability and 
validity of data) and clear 
presentation of results e.g. by 
tabulation, graphically, textually 
(in the case of qualitative 
findings) (7.5 marks).
15
5. Statement of Main Findings and 
Discussion
a. Findings and discussion to be 
based on data from the thesis (4 
marks).
b. Coherence in the presentation of 
argument (3 marks).
c. Presentation of major findings of 
the project (4 marks).
d. Discussion/arguments to reflect 
the results in the context of the 
relevant research questions, 
theory, hypotheses or propositions 
(4 marks).
15

 39
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
CriteriaMarksGuidelines for assessment
6. Conclusions and Recommendations
a. Conclusive statements to 
incorporate the major findings of 
the thesis (2 marks).
b. Critical discussion of the key 
issues arising from the research, 
in terms of what was discovered, 
achieved, established, and argued 
(2 marks).
c. Statement of major contributions 
to knowledge in terms of 
theoretical or model building 
and methodology and policy 
recommendations/industrial 
application (2 marks).
d. Addressing and accounting for 
limitations such as researcher/
interviewer biases (2 marks).
e. Recommendations, as related 
to the objectives, and brief 
discussion of relevant and 
interesting future research 
directions (2 marks).
10
7. Presentation i.e., formatting, 
language, citation and referencing, 
sectioning, use of upper and lower 
cases, typing, clarity of tables, figures 
and plates, conforming to word-
length requirement etc.
10
TOTAL
100
The oral examination of a Doctoral thesis will be evaluated based on the format 
in Appendix 4.3.

40 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Appendix 4.3. Score Breakdown for Thesis Oral Examination
S/No.
Area of AssessmentDetails of AssessmentMaximum 
Mark
1
Presentation by 
PowerPoint
a. appropriateness of slides;
b. confidence in presentation;
c. articulation (Presentation with less 
reading from the slides);
d. presentation of key ideas; research 
problem, research objectives/goal, 
framework, methods, findings, etc.;
e. time management; and
f. clarity of communication
15
2
Understanding of 
Subject Matter during 
presentation
a. Ability to explain research data 
however anomalous;
b. Applicability of research data to the 
research problem;
c. Ability to link data to findings;
d. Ability to link findings to the 
conceptual framework, theory/
model/hypothesis;
e. Ability to explain why hypotheses 
or research objectives could not be 
realised;
f. Succinct statement of contribution of 
the research to knowledge; and
g. Limitations to the study.
45
3
Response to 
Questions/Other 
Considerations
a. Mastery of research questions/
objectives and hypotheses/
prepositions, if any;
b. Grasp of theoretical basis of the 
problem, i.e. understanding  of 
models and theories used;
40

 41
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
S/No.
Area of AssessmentDetails of AssessmentMaximum 
Mark
c. Clear understanding of conceptual 
framework and how it is related to 
the problem; and
d. Understanding of design and 
methods used to analyse the 
problem.
Total100

42 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Evaluation of MPhil Thesis
An MPhil Thesis will be assessed based on the detailed criteria presented in 
Appendix 3.4.
Appendix 4.4. Detailed Criteria, Marks and Guidelines for Assessment of 
MPhil Thesis
Criteria
Marks
Guidelines for 
assessment
1. Statement of the Problem and Justification for 
the Study
a. Ability to articulate or explain the import of 
the topic and its implications (3 marks).
b. Justification: An explanation of why the topic 
merits a study in local and/or international 
perspectives (3 marks).
c. Statement of Research Questions, Objectives 
and Hypotheses/Propositions (Where 
necessary) (4 marks).
10
• A candidate scores 
very high marks in 
each section of the 
detailed criteria if s/
he demonstrates high 
level of competence 
in all the listed areas 
plus any integral 
that examiner deems 
necessary.
2. Critical Review of Literature and Theoretical and 
Conceptual Frameworks/Modelling Techniques
a. Candidate’s demonstration of evidence 
of scholarly analysis, and criticism of 
research relevant to the topic/problem being 
investigated (5 marks).
b. Meticulous citation of relevant scholarly 
work by quotation, paraphrasing and/or 
commentary (5 marks).
c. Demonstration of competence in 
understanding and evaluating the material 
investigated (5 marks).
d. Candidate drawing differences and 
similarities between the thesis and previous 
investigations and identifying of knowledge 
gaps investigated (5 marks).
e. Candidate developing robust conceptual/
theoretical frameworks/modelling technique 
and justify drawing from the literature 
investigated (5 marks).
25
• A candidate scores 
close to 75% of the 
total marks if he 
demonstrates high 
level of competence 
in 75% of listed 
criteria plus any 
integral the examiner 
deems fit.

 43
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Criteria
Marks
Guidelines for 
assessment
3. Research Design and Methodology
a. Statement of the design or blueprint for the 
study: Whether qualitative, quantitative, 
mixed and whether cross-sectional in 
the collection mode, with justification 
investigated (6 marks).
b. Sampling Procedures: Determination of 
sample size, sample frames, techniques with 
justification (7 marks).
 c. Data collection techniques/tools, processes 
in the field and data analysis framework (7 
marks).
NB: The methodology must:
i. draw links with the theoretical/conceptual 
framework.
ii. state the research philosophy such as 
empiricism, pragmatism, positivism, etc..
20
• A candidate scores 
half of the marks 
allocated if s/he 
demonstrates high 
level of competence 
in 50% of the details 
listed plus any 
integral that the 
examiner deems fit.
• A candidate scores 
less than half of the 
allocated marks if s/
he demonstrates high 
level of competence 
in less than 50% 
of the criteria plus 
any integral that the 
examiner deems fit.
4. Analysis of Data and Presentation of Results
a. Use of appropriate methods and techniques 
to analyse the data (7 marks).
b. Accurate (i.e. reliability and validity of data) 
and clear presentation of results e.g. by 
tabulation, graphically, textually (in the case 
of qualitative findings) (5.5 marks).
12.5
5. Statement of Main Findings and Discussion
a. Findings and discussion to be based on data 
from the thesis (3 marks).
b. Coherence in the presentation of argument (3 
marks).
c. Presentation of major findings of the project 
(3 marks),
d. Discussion/arguments to reflect the results 
in the context of the relevant research 
questions, theory, hypotheses or propositions 
(3.5 marks).
12.5

44 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Criteria
Marks
Guidelines for 
assessment
6. Conclusions and Recommendations
a. Conclusive statements to incorporate the 
major findings of the thesis (2 marks).
b. Critical discussion of the key issues arising 
from the research, in terms of what was 
discovered, achieved, established, and 
argued (2 marks).
c. Statement of major contributions to 
knowledge in terms of theoretical or model 
building and methodology and policy 
recommendations/industrial application (2 
marks).
d. Addressing and accounting for limitations 
such as researcher/interviewer biases (2 
marks).
e. Recommendations, as related to the 
objectives, and brief discussion of relevant 
and interesting future research directions (2 
marks).
10
7. Presentation i.e., formatting, language, citation 
and referencing, sectioning, use of upper and 
lower cases, typing, clarity of tables, figures and 
plates, conforming to word-length requirement 
etc.
10
TOTAL
100
The Oral examination of an MPhil thesis shall follow the details in Appendix 4.5.

 45
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Table 4.5. Score Breakdown for Thesis Oral Examination
S/No.Area of 
Assessment
Details of AssessmentMaximum 
Mark
1
Presentation by 
PowerPoint
a. appropriateness of slides;
b. confidence in presentation;
c. articulation (Presentation with less 
reading from the slides);
d. presentation of key ideas; research 
problem, research objectives/goal, 
framework, methods, findings, etc.;
e. time management; and
f. clarity of communication
15
2
Understanding 
of Subject 
Matter during 
presentation
a. Ability to explain research data however 
anomalous
b. Applicability of data to the research 
problem
c. Ability to link data to findings;
d. Ability to link findings to the conceptual 
framework, theory/model/hypothesis;
e. Ability to explain why hypotheses or 
research objectives could not be realised;
f. Succinct statement of contribution of the 
research to knowledge; and
g. Limitations to the study.
45
3
Response to 
Questions/Other 
Considerations
a. Mastery of research questions/objectives 
and hypotheses/prepositions, if any;
b. Grasp of theoretical basis of the problem, 
i.e. understanding of models and 
theories used;
c. Clear understanding of conceptual 
framework and how related to the 
problem; and
d. Understanding of design and methods 
used to analyse the problem.
40
Total100

46 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Notes

 47
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Notes

48 
Guide for Preparation and Evaluation of  
Higher Degree Research Thesis
Notes