MLA Referencing quick guide 
Please note, this is a quick guide to citing and referencing using the MLA (9
th
 edition) referencing style. 
For more detailed examples, please go to Cite Them Right Online, or see the guidance on the MLA 
Style Center. 
Your referencing includes two main parts: 
— a citation within the text of your assignment 
— a list of references or bibliography at the end of your assignment 
In-text citations 
MLA in-text citations should: 
1. Identify the source of the information, e.g. author’s name or a brief title. Use whichever 
information appears first in the full reference for the item. 
2. Identify the location where the information was found, e.g. page number(s), chapter number(s), or 
time. For some items that have no pagination or other division, such as web pages or online 
articles, it may be appropriate to leave out this element of the reference. 
Examples: 
Book/journal article (Atwood 83–4) 
E-book without pagination (Austen ch. 5) 
Film (title in italics) (Alien 00:24:13–18) 
Web page (York St John University) 
Where multiple items by the same author are cited, you should also provide additional distinguishing 
information, such as a brief title. (Where titles are used, use either italics or “quote marks” depending 
on how the title appears in the full reference.) 
Book/journal article with 
distinguishing information 
(Atwood, Negotiating 83–4) 
Key reference examples 
Full information about the source is then provided in the bibliography or reference list at the end of the 
document. 
Books 
Format Author. Book title in italics. Edition, Publisher, Date. 
Example Atwood, Margaret. Negotiating with the dead: a writer on writing. 2
nd
 ed., Cambridge 
University Press, 2002. 
 
  

CC BY 4.0 International, July 2025 www.yorksj.ac.uk/library/ |  library@yorksj.ac.uk 
 
Journal articles 
Format Author. “Article title in quote marks.” Journal title in italics, Volume, Issue number, Date, 
Page range.  
 
For electronic articles: 
 
Author. “Article title in quote marks.” Journal title in italics, Volume, Issue number, Date, 
Page range. Collection in italics, DOI or URL. 
Examples Cowan, Brian William. “Mr. Spectator and the Coffeehouse Public Sphere.” Eighteenth-
Century Studies, vol. 37, no. 3, 2004, pp. 345–366. 
 
Falter, Elizabeth and Neville, Sarah. “William Shakespeare’s Much A-Zoom About 
Nothing.” International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media, vol. 16, no. 3, 2020, 
pp.306-318. EBSCO, 10.1080/14794713.2020.1831828. 
Web pages 
Format Author/corporate author. “Web page title in quote marks.” Website where the page is 
hosted in italics, Date last updated, URL. 
 
If the date the web page was last updated is not available, you should instead include the 
date of access after the URL: 
 
Author/corporate author. “Web page title in quote marks.” Website where the page is 
hosted in italics, URL. Accessed Date of access. 
Examples Modern Language Association of America. “Works Cited: A Quick Guide.” The MLA Style 
Center, 2022, https://style.mla.org/works-cited-a-quick-guide/. 
 
York St John University. “Your Academic Liaison Librarians.” York St John University, 
https://www.yorksj.ac.uk/students/library/academic-liaison-librarians/. Accessed 14 Jun. 
2022. 
Chapter in an edited book 
Format Author. “Chapter title in quote marks.” Book title in italics, edited by Editor, Publisher, Date, 
Page range. 
Example Robins, Fred C. “Beowulf.” The Cambridge companion to Old English Literature, edited by 
Malcolm Godden, Cambridge University Press, 2006, pp. 142–159. 
Film 
Format Film title in italics. Directed by Director, Film studio/distributor, Date. 
Example Alien. Directed by Ridley Scott, 20th Century Fox, 1979. 
Other resources 
Referencing examples for further resources can be found on Cite Them Right Online.