1 
 
 
 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY: 
TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY: TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES 
Dr. Prabhat  Pandey 
Dr. Meenu Mishra Pandey 
 
© Bridge Center, 2015 
BRIDGE CENTER 
Buzau, Al. Marghiloman 245 bis, 120082 
Tel. 0728394546 
e-mail: editor@euacademic.org 
Romania, European Union 
 
Printed in Romania 
First published, 2015 
 
ISBN 978-606-93502-7-0 
 
All   rights   reserved.   No   part   of   this   publication   may   be 
reproduced  or  transmitted,  in  any  form  or  by  any  means, 
without  permission.  Any person  who  does  any  unauthorised 
act  in  relation  to  this  publication  may  be  liable  to  criminal 
prosecution and civil claims for damages. 
The  publishers  have  applied  for  copyright  permission  for 
those    pieces    that    need    copyright    clearance    and    due 
acknowledgement will be made at the first opportunity. 
The  views  and  contents  of  this  book  are  solely  of  the  author. 
The author of the book has taken all reasonable care to ensure 
that  the  contents  of  the  book  do  not  violate  any  existing 
copyright  or  other  intellectual  property  rights  of  any  person 
in  any  manner  whatsoever.  In  the  event  the  author  has  been 
unable  to  track  any  source  and  if  any  copyright  has  been 
inadvertently infringed, please notify the publisher in writing 
for corrective action. 
 

 
 
3 
 
Dr. Prabhat  Pandey 
Dr. Meenu  Mishra  Pandey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY: TOOLS 
AND TECHNIQUES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bridge Center 
2015 

 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
 
C
C
O
O
N
N
T
T
E
E
N
N
T
T
S
S 
 
 
 
Preface................................................................................................................6 
Chapter 1 – Research...............................................................................7 
Chapter 2 - Research Process........................................................................13 
Chapter 3 - Research Design.........................................................................18 
Chapter 4 - Research Problem......................................................................23 
Chapter 5 - Variables and Their Types.........................................................29 
Chapter 6 - Formulation of Hypothesis.......................................................32 
Chapter 7 – Sampling.....................................................................................40 
Chapter 8 - Tools of Data Collection............................................................57 
Chapter 9 -  Data Analysis.............................................................................70 
Chapter 10 - Interpretation of Data.............................................................75 
Chapter 11 - Research Methods...................................................................78 
Chapter 12 - Descriptive or Survey Method...............................................84 
Chapter 13 - Experimental Method.............................................................89 
Chapter 14 - Research Proposal.................................................................101 
Chapter 15 - Research Report.....................................................................110 
Bibliography..................................................................................................116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6 
P
P
R
R
E
E
F
F
A
A
C
C
E
E
 
 
 
 
The  authors  felt  during  their  several  years  of  teaching  experience  that 
students fail to understand the books written on Research Methodology 
because  generally  they  are  written  in  technical  language.  Since  this 
course is not taught before the Master’s degree, the students are not 
familiar with its vocabulary, methodology and course contents. 
 The  authors  have  made  an  attempt  to  write  it  in  very  non-
technical  language.  It  has  been  attempted  that  students  who  try  to 
understand  the  research  methodology  through  self-learning  may  also 
find  it  easy.  The  chapters  are  written  with  that  approach.  Even  those 
students  who  intend  to  attain  high  level  of  knowledge  of  the  research 
methodology   in   social   sciences   will   find   this   book   very   helpful   in 
understanding   the   basic   concepts   before   they   read   any   book   on 
research methodology. 
 This  book  is  useful  those  students  who  offer  the  Research 
Methodology  at  Post  Graduation  and  M.Phil.  Level.  This  book  is  also 
very useful for Ph.D. Course Work examinations.  
 
                                                                   Dr. Prabhat Pandey 
                                                                   Dr. Meenu Mishra Pandey 

 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
Research 
 
Introduction: 
 
Research  is  an  essential  and  powerful  tool  in  leading  man  towards 
progress. Without systematic research there would have been very little 
progress. 
 John  W. Best has  rightly  said,  “The secret of  our  cultural 
development has been research, pushing back the areas of ignorance by 
discovering  new  truths, which, in  turn, lead  to  better  ways  of  doing 
things and better products.” 
 Scientific research  leads  to  progress  in  some  field  of  life. New 
products,  new  facts,  new  concepts  and  new  ways of  doing  things  are 
being  found due  to  ever-increasing  significant  research in  the  physical, 
the biological, the social and the psychological fields. Research today is 
no longer confined to the science laboratory. 
 
Meaning of Research: 
Word ‘Research’ is comprises of two words =  Re+Search. It  means  to 
search again. So research means a systematic investigation or activity to 
gain new knowledge of the already existing facts. 
 Research  is  an  intellectual activity.  It  is  responsible for bringing 
to light new knowledge. It is also responsible for correcting the present 
mistakes, removing existing misconceptions and adding new learning to 
the existing   fund   of   knowledge. Researches   are considered   as   a 
combination of those  activities which are removed from day to day  life 
1 

 
 
8 
and are pursued by those persons who are gifted in intellect and sincere 
in pursuit of knowledge. But  it is not correct  to say that  the research is 
restricted to  such  type  of persons,  however, it  is  correct  to  say  that 
major contribution of research comes from highly gifted and committed 
workers. Thus the  research is not  at  all mysterious and is carried on by 
hundreds of thousands of average individuals. 
 Research   is  also   considered   as  the  application   of   scientific 
method in solving the problems. It is a systematic, formal and intensive 
process of carrying on the scientific method of analysis. There are many 
ways   of   obtaining knowledge.   They are   intuition, revelation, and 
authority, logical manipulation of basic assumptions, informed guesses, 
observation, and reasoning by analogy. One of the branches of research 
known as empirical research is highly goal-oriented technique. 
 
Definitions of Research: 
The following are the important definitions of research: 
“Research is an endeavor  /  attempt  to  discover,  develop  and  verify 
knowledge.   It   is   an   intellectual   process   that   has   developed   over 
hundreds of  years  ever  changing  in  purpose  and  form  and  always 
researching to truth.”                                  
                                                                                                 J. Francis Rummel 
“Research is an honest, exhaustive,  intelligent  searching  for  facts  and 
their  meanings  or  implications  with  reference  to  a  given  problem.  The 
product or findings of a given piece of research should be an authentic, 
verifiable contribution to knowledge in the field studied.”               
                   P.M. Cook                                                                                                                                                         
“Research may be defined as a method of studying problems whose 
solutions are to be derived partly or wholly from facts.”       
                          W.S. Monroes                                                                                           
“Research  is  considered  to  be  the  more  formal, systematic  intensive 
process  of  carrying  on  the  scientific  method  of  analysis. It  involves  a 

 
 
9 
more  systematic  structure  of  investigation, usually  resulting  in  some 
sort   of   formal   record   of   procedures   and   a   report   of   results   or 
conclusion.”                   
   John W. Best                                                                       
“Research comprises defining  and redefining problems ,formulating 
hypothesis or suggested solutions, collecting ,organizing and evaluating 
data,  making  deductions  and  reaching  conclusions  and  at  last  careful  
testing  the  conclusions  to  determine  whether  they  fit  the  formulated 
hypothesis.”             
 Clifford Woody                                                                                                                    
“Research is a systematic effort to gain new knowledge.”   
Redman & Mori              
“Social research may be defined as a scientific undertaking which  by 
means  of  logical    and  systematized  techniques  aims  to  discover  new 
facts  or  verify  and  test  old  facts  ,  analyse  their  sequences  ,  inter-
relationships  and  casual  explanation  which  were  derived  within  an 
appropriate    theoretical  frame  of  reference  ,  develop  new  scientific 
tools  ,  concepts  and  theories  which  would  facilitate  reliable  and  valid 
study of human behavior.”                                       
   P.V. Younge   
 
Purpose of Research: 
The purpose of research is to discover answers to questions through the 
application  of  scientific  procedure. The  main  aim  of  research  is  to  find 
out the truth which is hidden and which has not been discovered as yet. 
Though each research study has its own specific purpose, some general 
objectives of research below: 
(i) To  gain  familiarity  with  a  phenomenon  or  to  achieve  new  insights 
into it. (Studies with this object in view are termed as exploratory or 
formative research studies). 

 
 
10 
(ii) To  portray  accurately  the  characteristics  of  a  particular  individual, 
situation  or  a  group.(Studies  with  this  object  in  view  are  known  as 
descriptive research studies). 
(iii) To  determine  the  frequency  with  which  something  occurs  or  with 
which it is associated with something else. (Studies with this object 
in view are known as diagnostic research studies). 
(iv)   To  test  a  hypothesis  of  a  causal  relationship  between  variables. 
(Such studies are known as hypothesis-testing research studies). 
 
Characteristics of Research: 
Following are the characteristics of research; 
(i) Research is directed toward the solution of a problem. 
(ii) Research requires expertise. 
(iii) Research    emphasizes    the    development    of    generalizations, 
principles,  or  theories  that  will  be  helpful  in  predicting  future 
occurrences. 
(iv) Research   is   based   upon observable   experience   or   empirical 
evidences. 
(v) Research demands accurate observation and description. 
(vi) Research  involves  gathering  new  data  from  primary  or first-hand 
sources or using existing data for a new purpose. 
(vii) Research  is characterized by  carefully  designed procedures  that 
apply rigorous analysis. 
(viii) Research involves the quest for answers to un-solved problems. 
(ix) Research strives   to   be   objective   and   logical,   applying   every 
possible   test   to   validate   the   procedures employed   the data 
collected and the conclusions reached. 
(x) Research is characterized by patient and unhurried activity. 
(xi) Research is carefully recorded and collected. 
(xii) Research sometimes requires courage. 
 
 

 
 
11 
Types of Research: 
There  are varieties of  ways  through  which  we  may  classify  it  into 
different categories. 
(A) On the basis of nature of information:  
On  the  basis of  nature  of  information we  can classify  the  research  into 
two types; 
(i) Qualitative Research: When information is in the form of qualitative 
data. 
(ii) Quantitative   Research:   When   information   is   in   the   form   of 
quantitative data. 
(B)  On  the  basis  of  utility  of  content  or  nature  of  subject  matter  of 
research: 
On  the  basis  of these  criteria we  can categorize the  research  into  two 
categories. 
(i) Basic/  Fundamental  /pure or  Theoretical  Research:  Its  utility  is 
universal. 
(ii) Experimental or Applied Research: Its utility is limited. 
(C) On the basis of approach of research: 
We may classify research into   two   different categories. 
(i) Longitudinal Research: Examples of this category are historical, Case 
study and Genetic research. 
(ii) Cross-Sectional     Research:     Examples     of     this     category     are 
Experimental and Survey Research. 
(D) On the basis of method of research :  
On  the  basis  of  research  method  we  may  classify  a  research  into  five 
different categories. 
(i)  Philosophical Research: It is purely qualitative in nature and we are 
focusing on the vision of others on the content of research. 
(ii) Historical Research:  It is  both  qualitative  as  well  as  quantitative  in 
nature and deals with past events. 

 
 
12 
(iii) Survey Research: It  deals with present events and is quantitative  in 
nature. It may further be sub-divided into; discretional, correlational 
and exploratory type of research. 
(iv) Experimental Research: This  is  purely  quantitative  in  nature and 
deals with future events. 
(v) Case-Study   Research:   It   deals   with   unusual   events. It   may   be 
qualitative  as  well  as  quantitative  in  nature  depending  upon  the 
content. 

 
 
13 
 
 
Research Process 
 
Research  process  consists  of  series  of  actions  or  steps  necessary  to 
effectively carry out research. These actions or steps are; 
(i) Formulating the Research Problem 
(ii) Extensive Literature Survey 
(iii) Developing the Research Hypothesis 
(iv) Preparing the Research Design 
(v) Determining the Research Design 
(vi) Collecting the Research Data 
(vii) Execution of the Project 
(viii) Analysis of Data 
(ix) Hypothesis Testing 
(x) Generalization and Interpretation 
(xi) Preparing of the Report  or Presentation of the Result 
 
(i) Formulation of Research Problem: 
At  the  very  outset,  the  researcher  must  decide  the  general  area  of 
interest or aspect of a subject matter that he would like to inquire into 
and then research problem should be formulated. 
 
(ii) Extensive Literature Survey:  
Once   the   problem   is   formulated   the   researcher   should   undertake 
extensive   literature   survey   connected   with   the   problem.   For   this 
purpose, the   abstracting   and   indexing   journals   and   published or 
2 

 
 
14 
unpublished bibliographies   are   the   first   place   to   go   to   academic 
journals, conference proceedings, government reports, books etc. must 
be tapped depending on the nature of the problem. 
 
(iii) Development of Working Hypothesis:  
After extensive literature survey, researcher should state in clear terms 
the  working  hypothesis  or  hypotheses.  Working  hypothesis  is  tentative 
assumption  made  in  order  to  draw  out  and  test  its  logical  or  empirical 
consequences. It’s very important or it provides the  focal  point  for 
research. 
 
(iv) Preparing the Research Design: 
After framing  hypothesis  we  have  to  prepare  a  research  design  i.e.  we 
have  to state the conceptual structure within which research would be 
conducted. The preparation of such a design facilitates research to be as 
efficient  as  possible  yielding  maximal  information.  In  other  words,  the 
function  of  research  design  is  to  provide  for  the  collection  of  relevant 
evidence with optimum effort, time and expenditure. But how all these 
can be achieved depends mainly on the research purpose. 
 
(v) Determining Sample Design:  
A sample design is a definite plan determined before any data is actually 
collected  for  obtaining  a  sample  from  a  given  population.in  census 
inquiry  we  involve  a  great  deal  of  time,  money  and  energy  so  it  it  not 
possible  in  practice  under  many  circumstances.  Sample  designs  can  be 
either  probability  or  non-probability. With  probability  samples  each 
element  has  a  known  probability  of  being  included  in  the  sample  but 
the non-probability samples do not allow  the researchers  to determine 
this probability. 
 

 
 
15 
(vi) Collecting the Data:  
There  are  several  ways  of  collecting  the  appropriate  data  which  differ 
considerably in context of cost, time and other resources at the disposal 
of the   researcher.   Primary   data   can   be   collected   either   through 
experiment  or  through  survey.  In  case  of  survey,  data  can  be  collected 
by any one or more of the following ways; 
By observation, 
 Through personal interview, 
 Through telephonic interviews, 
 By mailing of questionnaires or  
 Through schedules. 
 
(vii) Execution of the Project: 
Execution of project is a very important step in the  research process. If 
the  execution  of  the  project    proceeds  on  correct  lines,  the  data  to  be 
collected  would  be  adequate  and  dependable  .A  careful  watch  should 
be kept for unanticipated factors in order to keep the survey realistic as 
much as possible. 
 
(viii) Analysis of Data:  
The  analysis  of  data  requires  a  number  of  closely  related operations 
such as establishment of categories, the application of these categories 
to  raw  data through  coding,  tabulation  and  then  drawing statistical 
inference. Analysis  work  after  tabulation  is  generally  based  on  the 
computation   of   various percentages; coefficients   etc., by   applying 
various  well defined  statistical  formulae.  In  the  process  of analysis, 
relationships  of  differences supporting  or conflicting  with  original  or 
new   hypothesis   should   be   subjected   to   tests   of   significance   to 
determine   with   what   validity   data   can   be   said   to   indicate   any 
conclusions. 

 
 
16 
(ix) Hypothesis Testing:  
After  analyzing  the  data,  the  researcher  is  in  a  position  to  test  the 
hypothesis,  if any, he  had  formulated  earlier.  Do  the  facts support  the 
hypothesis  or  they  happen  to  be  contrary?  This  is  the  usual  question 
which  is  to  be  answered by  applying  various  tests  like ‘t’ test, ’F’ test 
etc.   F   test   have   been   developed   by   statisticians   for the   purpose 
.Hypothesis  testing  will  result  in  either  accepting  the  hypothesis  or  in 
rejecting   it. If   the   researcher   had   no   hypothesis   to   start   with, 
generalizations established on the basis of data may be stated. 
 
(x) Generalizations and Interpretation:  
If a hypothesis is tested and upheld several times, it may be possible for 
the  researcher  to  arrive  at  generalization i.e.  to  build  a  theory.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  real  value  of  research  lies  in  its  ability  to  arrive  at 
certain  generalizations.  If  the  researcher  had  no  hypothesis  to  start 
with, he might seek to explain his findings on the basis of some theory. 
It is known as interpretation. 
 
(xi) Preparation of the Report or the Thesis:  
Finally, the researcher has to prepare the report of what has been done 
by  him.  The layout  of  the  report should  be  as  follows; the preliminary 
pages,  the main text  and end matter. The  preliminary pages  carry  title, 
acknowledgements  and  forward  and  then  index.  The  main  text  of  the 
report should have introduction, review of literature and methodology. 
 
Criteria of Good Research: 
One expects scientific research to satisfy the following criteria: 
(a) The purpose of the research should be clearly defined and common 
concepts be used. 

 
 
17 
(b) The research procedure used should be described in sufficient detail 
to  permit  another researcher  to repeat  the  researcher for  further 
advancement, keeping  the  continuity  of  what has  already been 
attained. 
(c) The  procedural  design  of  the research  should be  carefully  planned 
to yield results that are as objective as possible. 
(d) The  researcher  should  report with  complete frankness, flaws  in 
procedural design and estimate their effects upon the findings. 
(e) The  analysis  of  data  should  be  sufficiently  adequate  to  reveal  its 
significance    and    the methods    of analysis    used    should    be 
appropriate.   The validity   and reliability   of the data   should be 
checked carefully. 
(f) Conclusions should be confined to those justified by the data of the 
research   and   limited   to   those   for which   the data   provide   an 
adequate basis. 
(g) Greater  confidence  in research  is warranted  if  the  researcher  is 
experienced,  has  a  good  reputation  in  research  and  is  a  person  of 
integrity. 

 
 
18 
 
 
Research Design 
 
A  research  design  is  simply  the  framework  or  plan  for  a study  that is 
used as a guide in collecting and analyzing the data. It is a blueprint that 
is followed  in  completing  a  study. Research  design  is  the  blue  print  for 
collection measurement and analysis of data. Actually it is a map that is 
usually developed to guide the research. 
 
Definitions: 
“Research   design is   a   master   plan   specifying   the   methods   and 
procedures for collection and analyzing the needed information.”  
                 William Zikmund 
“Research design is the plan, structure  and  strategy  of  investigation 
conceived so as to obtain answers to research questions and to control 
variance.”                  
                                                                                                              Kerlinger   
Thus we can say that a research design is the arrangement of condition 
for collection  and  analysis of  data in  a  manner  that  aims  to  generalize 
the findings of the sample on the population. 
 
Purpose of a Research Design: 
Research designs are used for the following purposes; 
(i) To minimize the expenditure: 
Research  design  carries an  important  influence  on  the  reliability  of  the 
results   attained .It   therefore   provides   a solid   base for   the  whole 
research. This  makes  the  research  as  effective  as  possible  by providing 
3 

 
 
19 
maximum information  with minimum  spending  of  effort,  money  and 
time by preparing the advance plan of all about the research.  
 
(ii) To facilitate the smooth scaling:  
Research  design  is  needed  because  it  facilitates  the  smooth  scaling  of 
the various research operations, thereby making research as efficient as 
possible  yielding  maximal  information  with  minimal  expenditure  of 
effort, time and money. 
 
(iii) To collect the relevant data and technique:  
Research  design stands  for advance planning  of  the  methods  to  be 
adopted for collecting the relevant  data and the techniques  to be  used 
in their analysis, keeping in view  the objective  of the research and the 
availability of staff time and money. Poor preparation of research design 
upset the entire project. 
 
(iv) To provide blue print for plans:  
Research design is needed due to the fact that it allows for the smooth 
working of many research operations. It is like blue print which we need 
in  advance  to  plan  the  methods  to  be  adopted for  collecting the 
relevant data and techniques to be used in its analysis for preparation of 
research project.    Just    as    for    better    economical    and    attractive 
construction  of a house  need a  blue  print  and  a map  of that, similarly 
we  needs  a  blue  print  or  a  design  for  the smooth  flow of  operation  of 
research. 
 
(v) To provide an overview to other experts: 
A research design provides an overview of all the  research process  and 
with the help of the design we can take  the help and  views of experts 

 
 
20 
of  that  field  .The  design  helps  the  investigator  to  organize  his  ideas  , 
which helps to recognize and fix his faults.  
 
(vi) To provide a direction:  
A research design provides a proper or particular direction to the other 
executives   and   others   who   are helping   us   into   the   process. The 
researcher    studies available,    literature and    learns    about    new 
(alternative approaches. 
 
Characteristics of Good Research Design: 
Generally  a  good  research  design  minimizes  bias  and  maximizes  the 
reliability of the data collected and analyzed. The design which gives the 
smallest   experimental   error   is   reported   to   be   the   best   design   in 
scientific   investigation. Similarly,   a   design   which   yields   maximum  
information   and   provides   an   opportunity   for   considering   different 
aspects  of  a  problem  is    considered  to  be  the  most  appropriate  and 
efficient   design.   A   good   research   design   possesses   the   following 
characteristics; 
 
(i) Objectivity: 
It  refers  to  the  findings  related  to  the  method  of  data  collection  and 
scoring   of   the   responses.   The   research   design   should   permit   the 
measuring   instruments   which   are   fairly   objective   in   which   every 
observer or judge scoring the performance must precisely give the same 
report.  In  other  words, the  objectivity  of  the  procedure may  be  judged 
by  the  degree  of  agreement  between  the  final  scores  assigned  to 
different  individuals by  more  than one  independent  observer.  This 
ensures  the objectivity  of the  collected  data  which  shall  be  capable  of 
analysis and interpretation. 
 

 
 
21 
(ii) Reliability:  
It  refers  to  consistency  throughout  a  series  of  measurements.  For 
example, if a respondent gives out a response to a particular item, he is 
expected  to  give  the  same  response  to  that  item  even  if  he  is  asked 
repeatedly.  If  he   is  changing  his  response   to  the  same   item,  the 
consistency  will  be  lost.  So  the  researcher  should  frame  the  items  in  a 
questionnaire in such a way that it provides consistency or reliability. 
 
(iii) Validity:  
Any measuring device or instrument is said to be valid when it measures 
what  it  is  expected  to  measure.  For  example,  an  intelligence  test 
conducted  for  measuring  the  IQ  should  measure  only  the  intelligence 
and nothing else and the questionnaire shall be framed accordingly. 
 
(iv) Generalizability:  
It  means  how  best  the  data collected  from the  samples  can  be  utilized 
for  drawing  certain  generalizations  applicable  to  a  large  group  from 
which sample  is drawn. Thus a research design helps an investigator to 
generalize  his  findings  provided  he  has  taken  due  care  in  defining  the 
population,   selecting   the   sample,   deriving   appropriate   statistical 
analysis etc. while preparing the research design. Thus a good research 
design  is  one  which  is  methodologically  prepared  and  should  ensure 
that   generalization   is   possible. For ensuring   the generalization  we 
should    confirm    that    our    research    problem    has    the    following 
characteristics; 
a) The problem is clearly formulated. 
b) The population is clearly defined. 
c) Most  appropriate  techniques  of  sample  selection  are  used  to 
form an appropriate sample. 
d) Appropriate statistical analysis has been carried out. 

 
 
22 
e) The findings of the study are capable of generalizations. 
 
(v)  Adequate Information:   
The most  important  requirement  of  good  research  design  is  that  it 
should provide adequate information so that the research problem can 
be  analyzed  on  a  wide  perspective.  An  ideal  design  should  take  into 
account important factors like; 
(i) Identifying the exact research  problem to be studied 
(ii) The objective of the research 
(iii) The process of obtaining information 
(iv) The availability of adequate and skilled manpower and  
(v) The  availability  of  adequate  financial  resources  for  carrying 
research. 
 
(vi)  Other Features:  
Some other important features of a good research design are flexibility, 
adaptability, efficiency,  being  economic  and  so  on.  A  good  research 
design should minimize bias and maximize reliability and generalization. 

 
 
23 
 
 
 Research Problem 
 
The problems lie everywhere around us. They even lie at our door step 
and  in  our  backyards.  Human  nature  is  so  complicated,  that  a  problem  
solved for one individual may still exist for another individual, a problem 
solved  for  one  class/  school/teacher/  situation/  system/time  etc.,    still 
remains a problem for another class/ school/ teacher/ 
situation/system/time  or  a  problem  solved  for  the  time  being  may 
reappear with a lapse  of time. We become  habitual of living in the age 
of  problems  i.e.  we  are  so  much  surrounded  by  the  problem that  we 
suffers from ,”problem  blindness”. But in order to solve the problem or 
making research we need to delimit the problem.  
 Selection   of   problem   is  not   the   first   step   in   research   but 
identification  of  the  problem  is  the  first  step  in  research.  Selection  of 
problem  is governed by  reflective thinking.  It is wrong  to  think  that 
identification  of a problem  means  to select  a  topic  of  a  research  or 
statement of the problem. 
 A  topic or statement of the  problem  and  research  problem  are 
not the synonyms but they are inclusive. The problem concerns with the 
functioning of the broader area of field studied, whereas a topic or title 
or  statement  of  the  problem  is  the  verbal  statement  of  the  problem. 
The  topic  is  the  definition  of  the problem  which delimits  or  pin  points 
the task of a researcher. 
 It is  the usual  practice  of  the  researcher  that  they  select  the 
topic  of  the  study  from different  sources especially from  research 
abstracts. They  do  not  identify  the problem, but  a  problem  is made  on 
the basis of the topic. It results that they have no active involvement in 
their research activities, whatever, they do, do mechanically. 
4 

 
 
24 
Definitions of the Problem: 
The obstacles which hinder our path are regarded as problem. Different 
definitions of the problem are given below; 
“Problem is the obstacle in the path of satisfying our needs.”       
John  Geoffery 
“Problem is a question which is to be solved.”                     
John. G. Tornsand 
“To define a problem means to put a fence around it, to separate it by 
careful  distinctions  from  like  questions  found  in  related  situations  of 
need.”         
 Whitney 
“A problem is a question proposed for a solution generally speaking a 
problem exists when there is a no available answer to same question.”    
J.C. Townsend 
“A problem is  an  interrogative  sentence  or  statement  that  asks:  What 
relation exists between two or more variables?”                                        
F.N. Kerlinger 
“To define a problem means to specify it in detail  and  with  precision 
each  question  and  subordinate  question  to  be  answered  is  to  be 
specified,    the    limits    of    the    investigation    must    be    determined. 
Frequently,   it   is   necessary   to   review   previous   studies   in   order   to 
determine   just  what  is  to  be   done.  Sometimes   it   is  necessary  to 
formulate   the   point   of   view   or   educational   theory   on   which   the 
investigation is to be based. If certain assumptions are made, they must 
be explicitly noted.”                                                          
   Monero and  Engelhart 
 
Identification of a Research Problem: 
The following steps are to be followed in identifying a research problem; 

 
 
25 
Step I   Determining the field of research in which a researcher is keen 
to do the research work. 
Step  II The  researcher  should  develop  the  mastery  on  the  area  or  it 
should be the field of his specialization. 
Step  III He  should review  the research conducted  in  area  to  know  the 
recent trend and studies are being conducted in the area. 
Step  IV On  the  basis  of  review,  he  should  consider  the  priority  field  of 
the study. 
Step  V He  should  draw an  analogy  and  insight  in  identifying  a  problem 
or  employ  his  personal  experience  of  the  field  in  locating  the 
problem. He may take help of supervisor or expert of the field.  
Step VI He should pin point specific aspect of the problem which is to be 
investigated. 
 
The Sources of the Problem: 
(i) The  classroom,  school,  home,  community  and  other  agencies  of 
education are obvious sources. 
(ii) Social  developments  and  technological  changes  are  constantly 
bringing forth new problems and opportunities for research. 
(iii) Record   of   previous   research   such   specialized   sources   as   the 
encyclopedias of    educational,    research    abstracts,    research 
bulletins,  research  reports,  journals  of  researches,  dissertations 
and   many similar   publications   are rich   sources of   research 
problems. 
(iv) Text  book  assignments,  special  assignments,  reports  and  term 
papers will suggest additional areas of needed research. 
(v) Discussions-Classroom   discussions,   seminars   and   exchange   of 
ideas  with faculty members and fellow  scholars and students will 
suggest    many    stimulating    problems    to    be    solved,    close 

 
 
26 
professional  relationships, academic  discussions and  constructive 
academic climate are especially advantageous opportunities. 
(vi) Questioning  attitude:  A questioning  attitude  towards  prevailing 
practices and research    oriented academic    experience    will 
effectively promote problem awareness. 
(vii) The  most practical  source  of  problem  is  to  consult  supervisor, 
experts  of  the  field  and  most  experienced  persons  of  the  field. 
They  may  suggest most  significant problems  of  the  area.  He  can 
discuss certain issues of the area to emerge a problem. 
 
Although research problems should not be  assigned or they should not 
be  proposed  and  allotted  by  a  guide  but  consultation  with  the  more 
experienced faculty member or research worker is a desirable practice.  
 One of the most important functions of the research guide is to 
help  the student  clarify his  thinking, achieve  a  sense of  focus  and 
develop  a  manageable  problem  from  one  that  may  be  vague  and  too 
complex.   
 
Statement of Problem: 
Kerlinger has   identified   following   three   criteria   of   good   problem 
statements; 
1. A problem should be concerned with relation between two or more 
variables. 
2. It should be stated ‘clearly and unambiguously in question form’. 
3. It should be amenable to empirical testing. 
 
Meeting  these  criteria  in  his  problem  statement  will  result,  in  a  clear 
and concise idea of what the researcher wants to do. This sets the state 
for further planning. 
 

 
 
27 
Objectives of Assumptions about the Problem: 
1. To make the research work feasible. 
2. To delimit the scope of the problem. 
3. To establish the proper frame of reference. 
 
Aspects of Delimiting a Problem: 
1. Delimited to certain variables that should be mentioned clearly 
in the problem. 
2. Delimited to the area or level as primary level, secondary level, 
college or university level. 
3. Delimited  to  size of  sample,  considering  the  time,  energy  and 
money. 
4. Delimited to the best method only. 
5. Delimited to the best available tool for measuring the variable. 
6. Delimited to   the most appropriate techniques. 
7. Other delimitations particular to a problem.  
 As  the  above  delimitations  help the  researcher  for  conducting 
the study, the findings of studies also confine to these delimitations. 
 
Evaluation of the Problem: 
When  considering a  problem  a  researcher  is  required  to  ask  himself  a 
series  of  questions  about  it. These  are  helpful  in  the  evaluation  of  the 
problem on the basis of personal suitability of the researcher and social 
value of the problem. 
 Following questions must be  answered affirmatively before the 
study is under Taken: 
1. Is the Problem Researchable? 
2. Is the Problem New? 

 
 
28 
3. Is the Problem Significant? 
4. Is the Problem Feasible for the Particular Researcher? 
 
In order to be feasible, a problem should agree with the following: 
a) Research competencies of the Researcher 
b) Interest and  enthusiasm of the Researcher 
c) Financial  consideration in the Project 
d) Time requirement for the Project 
e) Administrative considerations in the Project. 

 
 
29 
 
 
Variables and Their Types 
  
Variable  is  a  concept  which  can  take  on  different  quantitative  values. 
For  example;  height, weight,  income, age  etc. The  main  focus  of  the 
scientific study is to analyse the functional relationship of the variables. 
A  variable  is  a  quantity  which  can  vary  from  one  individual  to  another. 
The quantity which can vary from person to person.  
“Variable is a property that taken on different value”, 
Kerlinger 
It  is  any  feature  or  aspect  of  an  event, function  or  process  that,  by  its 
presence  and nature, affects  some  other  event  or  process,  which  is 
being studied. 
(i) Continuous Variable: 
It is that which can assume any numerical value within a specific range. 
(ii) Discrete Variable:  
A  variable  for  which  the  individual  values  fall  on  the  scale  only  with 
distinct gaps is called a discrete variable. 
(iii) Dependent Variable or Criterion variable:  
If  one  variable  depends  or  is  a  consequence  of  other,  it  is  termed  as 
dependent   variable. Criterion   variable   is   the   basis   on   which   the 
effectiveness of the experimental variable is studied. 
(iv) Independent Variable or Experimental Variable:  
The  variable  that  is  antecedent  to the  dependent variable  is  termed  as 
an independent variable. The variable whose effect is going to be known 
is known as experimental variable. 
 
 
5 

 
 
30 
(v) Controlled Variable: 
The effectiveness of an experimental variable is examined by comparing 
with other variable, known as controlled variable. 
(vi) Confounding Variable:  
Those  aspects  of  study  or  sample, that  might  influence  the  dependent 
variable  (outcome measures) ,and  whose  effect  may  be  confused  with 
the   effects   of   the   independent   variable. They   are   of   two types; 
Intervening and extraneous variable. 
(vii) Intervening Variable:  
There   are   a   number   of   abstract variables   in educational/social 
experiments, which  intervene  the  effect  of  experimental  or criterion 
variable. For controlling   intervening   variable   appropriate   research 
design should be used. Intervening variables are hard if not impossible, 
to observe because they usually have to do with an individual’s feelings 
like boredom, stress, fatigue, excitement etc. Extraneous variable on the 
other hand, are more readily observed or measured and thus are more 
easily controlled. 
(viii) Extraneous Variable:  
Independent variables that are not related to the purpose of the study, 
but   may affect the   dependent   variable   are   termed   as   extraneous 
variables. Suppose  the  researcher  wants  to  test  the  hypothesis  that 
there  is  a  relationship  between  children’s  gain   in   social   studies 
achievement and  their  self-concept. Here  self-concept  is  independent 
variable   and achievement   in   social   study   is   dependent   variable. 
Intelligence may as well affect the social studies achievement; but since 
it   is   not related   to the   purpose   of  the   study  undertaken   by   the 
researcher, it will be termed as extraneous variable. Whatever effect  is 
noticed  on  dependent  variable  as  a  result  of  extraneous  variable(s)  is 
technically described as an ‘experimental error.’ 
 A  study  must  always  be  so  designed    that  the  effect  upon  the 
dependent  variable  is  attributed    entirely  to  the  independent  variables 

 
 
31 
and not to some extraneous variable(s).When the dependent variable is 
not  free  from  the  influence  of  extraneous  variable(s),  the  relationship 
between   the   dependent   and   independent   variable   is   said   to   be 
confounded by an  extraneous variable(s). 
 Extraneous variable can be controlled by removing the  variable 
causing distraction. It may be eliminated by selecting cases with uniform 
characteristics and through randomization. 
(ix) Organismic Variable:  
There  are  some  variables  which  cannot  be  manipulated.  They  are 
accepted  by  the  researcher  as  they  are. They  are  levels  of  intelligence, 
sex, class levels, and the like. The researcher can classify the subjects by 
sex but  he  cannot  modify to suit his research condition. If a researcher 
attempts   to   compare   boys   and   girls   on   some   learning   task,   any 
differences might  be attributed  to sex  differences  but  not  necessarily 
so. The differences  between boys  and  girls  could  be  due  to  differences 
in  intelligence, training, motivation  or  a  myriad  of  other  conditions 
present in all human beings and not necessarily to biological differences 
between sex. Those variables which cannot be manipulated and cannot 
themselves point out causal relations are called organismic variables. 

 
 
32 
 
 
Formulation of Hypothesis 
 
Formulation of Hypothesis 
The word hypothesis consists of two words –Hypo+Thesis. ‘Hypo’ means 
tentative or subject to the verification. ‘Thesis’ means statement about 
solution of the problem. Thus the literal meaning of the term hypothesis 
is  a tentative  statement about  the solution of  the  problem.  Hypothesis 
offers  a  solution  of  the  problem  that  is  to  be  verified  empirically  and 
based on some rationale. 
 Again, ’hypo’ means the composition of two or more variables 
which are to be verified and ‘thesis’ means position of these variables in 
the specific frame of reference. 
 
Definitions of Hypothesis: 
“Any  supposition  which  we  make  in  order  to  endeavor  to  deduce 
conclusions in accordance with facts which are  known to be real under 
the idea that if the conclusions to which the hypothesis leads are known 
truths, the hypothesis itself either must be or at least likely to be true.”                                                
J.S. Mill 
“A hypothesis is a tentative generalization the validity of which remains 
to  be  tested.  In  its  most  elementary  stage  the  hypothesis  may  be  any 
hunch,   guess,   imaginative   idea which   becomes basis   for   further 
investigation.”  
 Lundberg 
“It is a shrewd guess or inference that is formulated and provisionally 
adopted to explain observed facts or conditions and to guide in further 
investigation.”  
                                                                                                       John W. Best 
6 

 
 
33 
 
“A hypothesis is a statement temporarily accepted as true in the light of 
what is, at the time, known about a phenomenon, and it is employed as 
a  basis  for  action  in  the  search for  new,  truth,  when  the  hypothesis  is 
fully established, it may take the form of facts, principles and theories.”                                   
Barr and Scates 
“Hypothesis is an assumption whose testability is to be  tested  on  the 
basis of the compatibility of its implications with empirical evidence and 
previous knowledge.”                                
                                                                                                      Gorge J. Mouly 
 
Nature of Hypothesis: 
(i) Conceptual: Some kind of conceptual elements  in the  framework 
are involved in a hypothesis. 
(ii) Verbal  statement  in  a  declarative  form: It  is  a  verbal  expression 
of  ideas  and  concepts. It  is  not  merely  mental  idea  but  in  the 
verbal form, the idea is ready enough for empirical verification. 
(iii) It  represents the tentative  relationship between  two  or  more 
variables. 
(iv) Forward  or  future  oriented:  A  hypothesis  is  future-oriented. It 
relates   to   the   future   verification   not the   past   facts   and 
information. 
(v) Pivot  of  a  scientific  research:  All  research  activities  are  designed 
for verification of hypothesis. 
 
Functions of Hypothesis: 
H.H. Mc Ashan has mentioned the following functions of hypothesis; 
(i) It  is  a  temporary  solution  of  a  problem  concerning  with  some 
truth which enables an investigator to start his research works. 

 
 
34 
(ii) It offers a basis in establishing the specifics what to study for and 
may provide possible solutions to the problem. 
(iii) It may lead to formulate another hypothesis. 
(iv) A preliminary hypothesis may take the shape of final hypothesis. 
(v) Each hypothesis provides the investigator with definite statement 
which  may  be  objectively  tested  and  accepted  or  rejected  and 
leads  for  interpreting  results  and  drawing  conclusions  that  is 
related to original purpose. 
(vi) It delimits field of the investigation. 
(vii) It sensitizes the researcher so that he should work selectively, and 
have very realistic approach to the problem. 
(viii) It offers the simple means for collecting evidences for verification. 
 
Importance of a Hypothesis: 
(i) Investigator’s eyes: Carter  V.  Good thinks  that  by  guiding  the 
investigator   in   further   investigation   hypothesis   serves   as   the 
investigator’s  eyes  in  seeking  answers  to  tentatively  adopted 
generalization. 
(ii) Focuses  research: Without  hypothesis,  a  research  is  unfocussed 
research   and   remains like   a   random   empirical   wandering. 
Hypothesis serves  as  necessary  link  between  theory  and  the 
investigation. 
(iii) Clear  and  specific  goals:  A  well  thought out  set  of  hypothesis 
places  clear  and  specific  goals  before  the  research  worker  and 
provides  him  with  a  basis  for  selecting  sample  and  research 
procedure to meet these goals. 
(iv) Links  together:  According  to Barr  and  Scates,  “It  serves  the 
important    function    of    linking    together    related    facts    and 
information and organizing them into wholes.” 

 
 
35 
(v) Prevents  blind  research:  In  the  words  of P.V.  Young, ”The use of  
hypothesis prevents a blind search and indiscriminate gathering of 
masses  of  data  which  may  later  prove irrelevant  to  the  problem 
under study."  
(vi) Guiding Light: ”A hypothesis serves as powerful beacon that lights 
the way for the research work.” 
(vii) It   provides   direction to   research   and   prevent   the   review   of 
irrelevant literature and the collection of useful or excess data. 
(viii) It sensitizes the investigator certain aspects of situation which are 
irrelevant from the standpoint of problem at hand. 
(ix) It  enables  the  investigator  to  understand  with  greater  clarity    his 
problem and its ramification. 
(x) It  is  an  indispensible  research  instrument,  for  it  builds  a  bridge 
between the problem and the location of empirical evidence that 
may solve the problem. 
(xi) It provides the investigator with the most efficient instrument for 
exploring and explaining the unknown facts. 
(xii) It provides a frame work for drawing conclusion. 
(xiii) It stimulates the investigator for further research. 
 
Forms of Hypothesis: 
According to Bruce W. Tuckman following are the forms of hypothesis; 
(i) Question form:  
A  hypothesis  stated  as  a  question  represents  the  simplest level  of 
empirical  observation.  It  fails  to  fit  most  definitions  of  hypothesis.  It 
frequently  appears  in  the  list.  There  are cases  of simple  investigation 
which  can  be  adequately  implemented  by  raising  a  question, rather 
than dichotomizing  the hypothesis  forms  into  acceptable  / reject  able 
categories. 
 

 
 
36 
(ii) Declarative Statement :  
A   hypothesis   developed   as   a declarative statement   provides an 
anticipated   relationship   or difference   between variables. Such   a 
hypothesis  developer  has examined  existing  evidence  which  led  him to 
believe that a difference   may be anticipated as additional evidence. It 
is  merely  a  declaration of the independent  variables effect  on  the 
criterion variable. 
(iii) Directional Hypothesis :  
A   directional   hypothesis connotes   an   expected direction   in   the 
relationship  or difference  between  variables. This  type of  hypothesis 
developer  appears  more  certain  of anticipated  evidence. If  seeking  a 
tenable   hypothesis is   the   general   interest   of   the   researcher,   this 
hypothesis  is  less  safe  than  the  others  because  it  reveals  two  possible 
conditions. First that  the  problem  of  seeking  relationship  between 
variables  is  so  obvious  that  additional  evidence  is  scarcely  needed. 
Secondly, researcher  has examined  the  variables  very  thoroughly  and 
the    available    evidence    supports    the    statement    of    a    particular 
anticipated outcome. 
(iv)   Non –Directional Hypothesis or Null Hypothesis:  
This hypothesis  is  stated  in  the  null  form  which  is  an  assertion  that  no 
relationship  or no  difference  exists  between  or among  the  variables. 
Null hypothesis is a statistical hypothesis testable within the framework 
of probability theory. It is a non-directional form of hypothesis. 
 There   is   a   trend   to   employ   or   develop   null   hypothesis   in 
research  in  most  of  the  disciplines. A  null  hypothesis  tentatively  states 
that  on the  basis  of  evidence  tested  there  is  no  difference.  If  the  null 
hypothesis  is  rejected,  there  is  a  difference  but  we  do  not  know  the 
alternative   or   the   differences.   In   this   the   researcher   has   not   to 
anticipate or give the rational for the declaration or directional form. It 
does  not  make  researcher  biased  or  prejudiced.  He  may be  objective 
about the expected outcomes of the research or findings. 

 
 
37 
Actually  this  is  a  statistical  hypothesis  which  is  self- explanatory.  Null 
hypothesis means zero hypotheses. A researcher has not to do anything 
in developing it. While research hypothesis is second step in the process 
of reflective thinking. 
 A    null    hypothesis    in    an    appropriate    form    is    order    to 
accommodate  the  object  of  inquiry  for  extracting  this  information.  It 
does not necessarily reflect the expectations of the researcher so much 
as the utility of the null form as the best fitted to the logic of chance in 
statistical knowledge or science. 
 It  is  the  no  difference  form,  i.e.  there  is  no  difference  or 
relationship between or among variables under certain conditions. 
 Statistical tests of significance are used to accept and reject the 
null hypothesis. If it is rejected, the general hypothesis is accepted. 
 Non-directional hypothesis is known as null hypothesis because 
it ‘nullifies’ the positive  argument of  the  findings  or  non-directional 
statement  of  the generalization.  It  is  also  termed  as  statistical  or  zero 
hypothesis  because  it denies  the existence  of  any  systematic  principles 
apart from the effect of chance. It assumes that none or zero difference 
exists between the two population means or the treatments.  
 
Formulation of Testable Hypothesis: 
A  hypothesis  is  a  tentative  assumption  drawn  from  knowledge  and 
theory. It is used as a guide in the investigation of other facts and theory 
that are as yet unknown. Its formulation is one of the most difficult and 
most  crucial  step  in  the  entire  scientific  process. A  poorly  chosen  or 
poorly worded hypothesis can prevent the following: 
(i) The obtaining of enough pertinent data, 
(ii) The drawing of conclusions and generalizations ,and  
(iii) The application of certain statistical measures in the analysis of 
the result. 

 
 
38 
 
Hypothesis  is  the  central core of  study  that  directs the  selection of  the 
data  to  be  gathered,  the  experimental  design,  the  statistical  analysis 
and the conclusions drawn from the study. 
 A study may be devoted to the testing of one major hypothesis, 
a   number   of   subsidiary   hypothesis,   or   both   major   and   subsidiary 
hypotheses.  When  several hypotheses  are used,  each  should  be  stated 
separately  in  order  to  anticipate  the  type  of  analysis  required  and  in 
order  to  definitely accept  or reject  each  hypothesis  on  its  own  merit. 
Irrespective of number or type used each hypothesis should be testable 
and based upon a logical foundation. 
 
Fundamental Basis of Hypothesis: 
The researcher deals with reality on two levels; 
1. The Operational Level:  
On  the  operational  level  researcher  must  define  events  in  observable 
terms in order to operate with the reality necessary to do researches. 
2. The Conceptual Level:  
On  the  conceptual level  the researcher  must  define  events  in  terms  of 
underlying  communality with  other  events. Defining  at  a  conceptual 
level, the researcher   can abstract   from   single   specific   to general 
instance and   begin   to   understand   how   phenomena   operate   and 
variables  interrelate.  The  formulation  of a hypothesis very  frequently 
requires  going  from  an  operational  or  concrete  level  to  the  conceptual 
or  abstract  level. This  movement  to  the  conceptual level  enables the 
result  to be  generalized beyond  the specific  conditions of  a  particular 
study and thus to be of wider applicability. 
Research requires the  ability   to move  from the operational to 
the  conceptual  level  and  vice–versa. This  ability  is  required  not only  in 
constructing  experiments but in  applying their  findings  as  well.  The 

 
 
39 
process    of    making    conceptual contrasts    between    operational 
programme is called conceptualization or dimensionalization. 
 
Difficulties in the Formulation of Useful Hypothesis: 
Moving from the operational to the conceptual level and vice –versa is a 
critical ingredient of the research to demonstration process.  The 
following are the difficulties in the formulation of hypothesis: 
1. Absence of knowledge of a clear theoretical framework. 
2. Lack of ability to make use of the theoretical framework logically. 
3. Lack  of  acquaintance with available research  technique  resulting  in 
failure to be able to phrase the hypothesis properly. 

 
 
40 
 
 
 Sampling 
 
A survey may be conducted by either of two methods   
1. Census Method or Parametric method and   
2. Sampling method or Non-parametric method. 
 
1. Census method: 
It  deals  with  the  investigation of  the entire  population. Here  the data 
are collected  for each  and every  unit  of the  universe. This method 
provides more accurate and exact information as no unit is left out. 
 
2. Sampling method: 
Here  a small group is selected as representative  of the whole  universe. 
It  works  with  the  objective  to obtain  accurate  and reliable  information 
about  the  universe with minimum of  cost, time    and  energy  and  to  set 
out  the  limits  of  accuracy  of  such  estimates. It  makes exhaustive  and 
intensive study  possible with  much    less  time,  money  and  material. Its 
more popular in research work. 
 
Population: 
Population or universe means, the entire mass of observations, which is 
the  parent  group  from  which  a  sample  is  to  be  formed. The  term 
population  or universe  conveys  a  different  meaning  than  a  traditional 
one. In  census  survey,  the  count  of  individuals  (men,  women  and 
children) is known as population. 
7 

 
 
41 
But  in  Research  Methodology  population  means  characteristics  of  a 
specific  group. For  example  secondary school teachers  of,  who  have 
some specific features like teaching experience, teaching attitudes etc. 
 Sampling  means  selecting a  given  number  of  subjects  from  a 
defined population as representative of that population. 
 One     type     of     population distinguished     by     educational 
researchers  is called  the target  population.  
 By target population distinguished by educational researchers is 
called the  target population.  
 By  target  population,  also called  universe,  we  mean  all  the 
members of a real  or hypothetical  set of people , events  or objects to 
which we wish to generalize  the results  of our research. 
 
The first step in sampling is to define the target population. 
Research work is guided by inductive thinking. The researcher proceeds 
from  specificity to  generality.  The  sample observation  is the specific 
situation, which is applied to the population, it is the general situation.   
 The measures of a sample are known as statistics and measures 
of  a  population  are  termed  as  parameter.  Mean, S.D., coefficient  of 
Correlation  of  sample  observation  known  as  Statistics  and  Mean, S.D., 
coefficient   of   correlation   of   population   are   known   as   parameters. 
Generally parameters are estimated on the basis of sample statistics. 
 Sampling is indispensable technique  in behavioral research and 
not  so  common  in  physical  sciences. It  is  fundamental to  all  statistical 
methodology  of   behavioral   and   social   research.   It makes   research 
findings   economical   and   accurate. Sampling   means   selection   of 
individuals  from  the  population in such  a  way  that  every  individual  has 
equal chance to be taken into the sample. 
Term sample should be reserved for a set of units or portion  of 
an  aggregate  of  material  which  has  been  selected  in  the  belief  that    it 

 
 
42 
will be  representative  of the  whole  aggregate. By  Frank  Yates “Sample 
is set of units of an aggregate.” 
 
Assumptions of Sampling: 
1. Homogeneity amidst complexity:  
Social phenomenon is very complex in nature and every unit appears to 
be  different from  another. But  at  the  same  time  they  also possess 
similarities  in many  respects. It  is, therefore, assumed  that there  is the 
possibility  of such representative  types  in the  whole  population  that  
makes  sampling  possible. 
 
2. Possibility of Representative Selection: 
Sampling  has  its  origin in  the  mathematical  theory of probability  and 
law  of  statistical  regularity. The  law  of  statistical regularity  lays down 
that a  group  of  objects  chosen  at  random  from  a  large  group  tend to 
possess the characteristics of that large group (universe) by 
 L. R. Conner. 
 
3. Absolute  accuracy not essential  but relative  or  significant accuracy 
i.e. needed in case   of large  scale observations. Because  it is practically 
impossible to achieve  because of  errors  in  measurement,  collection  of 
data , its analysis, interpretation. 
 
Definition: 
“A statistical sample is a miniature picture or cross –section of the entire 
group or aggregate from which the sample is taken.”   
                    P. Y. Young 
 

 
 
43 
A sample is a small proportion of a population selected for observation 
and  analysis  .It  is  a  collection  consisting  of  a  part  or  sub-set  of the 
objects  or  individuals  of  population  which  is  selected  for  the  express 
purpose of representing the population. 
 By  observing  the  characteristics  of  the  sample,  one  can  make 
certain inferences about characteristics of the population from which it 
is drawn. 
 Sampling,”It  is  the  process  of  selecting  a  sample  from  the 
population. For this purpose, the population is divided into a number of 
parts called sampling units.” 
 Sampling  designs  means the  joint  procedure  of  selection  and 
estimation. Sampling is a part of the strategy of research. 
Sampling should be such that the error of estimation is minimum. 
 Good and Hatt, “A  sample  as  the  name implies,  is a  smaller 
representation of a larger whole.” 
 W. G. Cocharn, “In   every   branch   of   science   we   lack   the 
resources,  to  study  more  than  a fragment  of the  phenomenon  that 
might    advance    our knowledge.” i.e.    fragment    is    sample and 
phenomenon is population. The sample observations are applied to the 
phenomenon i.e. generalization. 
 David S. Fox, “In the social sciences, it is not possible to collect 
data from  every respondent  relevant  to our  study  but  only  from  some 
fractional   part of   the   respondents.   The   process   of   selecting   the 
fractional part is called sampling.” 
 
Need of Sampling: 
1. Economy of time. 
2. Economy of money. 
3. True detailed knowledge. 
4. Utility in experimental study. 

 
 
44 
5. It has reliability because it is based on probability theory. 
 
Advantages of Sampling: 
1. It has a greater adaptability. 
2. It is an economical technique. 
3. It has high speed for generalization. 
4. According  to W.G. Cocharan, “It  has  greater  precision and 
accuracy in the observation”. 
5. This technique has great accuracy. 
6. It has a greater speed in conducting a research work. 
7. It has a greater scope in the field of research. 
8. It reduces the cost of observation or data collection. 
 
Disadvantages or Limitation of Sampling: 
1. Scope of biasness.(Less accuracy) 
2. Problem of representative  sample-Difficulty  in selecting  a  truly   
representative sample. 
3. Need of eligible researchers. 
4. Instability of  sample  subjects or  changeability  of  units  i.e.  in 
heterogeneous population. 
5. There are certain situations where   sampling is possible.  
 
Essentials of an Ideal Sample: 
 Homogeneity: The units included in sample must be as likeness with 
other units. 
 Adequacy: A sample having 10% of the whole data is adequate. 
 Independence:  Every  unit should  be free  to  be  included  in  the 
sample. 

 
 
45 
 Representativeness; An ideal   sample   must   be   such that   it 
represents the whole data adequately. 
 
In  the number  of  units  included  in  a  sample  should  be  sufficient  to 
enable derivation of conclusions applicable to the whole data. 
Economical in terms of time and money. 
High level of reliability. 
 
Characteristics of a Good Sample: 
1. A   good sample   is the   true   representative   of   the population 
corresponding to its properties. 
2. The  population is  known  as  aggregate  of  certain  properties  and 
sample is called sub-aggregate of the universe. 
3. A  good  sample  is  free  from bias; the  sample does  not  permit 
prejudices, the  learning and  pre-conception,  imaginations  of  the 
investigator to influence its choice. 
4. A  good  sample  is  an  objective one; it  refers objectivity  in  selecting 
procedure or absence of subjective elements from the situation. 
5. A  good  sample  maintains  accuracy  .It  yields  an  accurate  estimates 
or statistics and does not involve errors. 
6. A good sample is comprehensive in nature. This feature of a closely 
linked with true-representativeness. Comprehensiveness is a quality 
of   a   sample   which   is   controlled   by   specific   purpose   of   the 
investigation. A sample may be comprehensive in traits but may not 
be a good representative of the population. 
7. A good  sample  has the practicability for research. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
46 
Types of Sampling Designs/Methods of Sampling 
 
 
    Sampling 
 
A    Probability Sampling                B    Non-Probability Sampling 
     A 1 Random Sampling                                   B-1 Incidental or Accidental Sampling 
    A-2 Systematic Sampling                              B-2 Judgment  Sampling  
     A-3 Stratified Sampling                                 B- 3 Purposive Sampling 
     A-4 Multistage Sampling                              B-4 Quota Sampling 
    A-5 Purposive Sampling 
     A-6 Cluster Sampling 
     A-7 Multiple Sampling or Double Sampling 
 
Difference between Probability and Non-Probability Sampling 
 Probability Sampling Non-probability Sampling 
1. 
It is a method of sampling which gives 
the probability that a sample is 
representative of population. 
In the absence of any idea of 
probability the method of sampling is 
known as non-probability sampling. 
2. 
Probability sampling is generally used 
in fundamental research in which the 
purpose is to generalize the results. 
It is generally used in action 
researches in which one studies a 
class without any generalization 
purpose. 
3. 
It refers from the sample as well as 
the population. 
There is no idea of population. 
4. 
Every individual of the population has 
equal probability to be taken into the 
sample. 
There is no probability of selecting 
any individual. 
5. 
It may be representative of the 
population. 
It has free distribution. 
6. 
Its observations (data) are used for the 
inferential purpose. 
The observations are not used for 
generalization purpose. 
7. 
Inferential or parametric statistics are Non-inferential or non-parametric 

 
 
47 
used. statistics are used. 
8. There is a risk of drawing conclusion. 
There is no risk for drawing 
conclusions. 
9. 
It is based on Law of probability 
sampling i.e. Law of Statistical 
Regularity and Law of Inertia of the 
Large Sample. 
It is not based on law of probability 
sampling. 
 
Probability Sampling: 
 
G.C.  Halmstadter, “A probability  sample is  one  that  has  been  used 
selected   in   such   a   way   that   every   element   chosen   has   a   known 
probability of being included.” 
 
Probability sampling is of different types: 
(1) Simple Random Sampling : 
It  is  one  in  which  each  element  of  the population  has an equal  and 
independent  chance  of being  included in  the  sample  i.e.  a  sample 
selected by randomization method is known as simple   random sample 
and this technique is simple randomizing. 
Randomization is done by using the following techniques: 
(a) Tossing a coin                     (b) Throwing a dice 
(b) Lottery method                  (d) Blind folded method 
(c) Tippett’s table method 
Merits of Randomization: 
1. It requires the minimum knowledge of population. 
2. It is free from subjectivity and free from personal error. 
3. It provides appropriate data for one’s purpose. 
4. The  observations  of  the  sample  can  be  used  for  inferential 
purpose. 

 
 
48 
Demerits of Randomization: 
1. It cannot ensure the representativeness of a sample. 
2. It does not use the knowledge about the population. 
3. Its inferential accuracy depends upon  the size of the sample. 
 
(2)   Systematic Sampling: 
Systematic   sampling   is   an   improvement   over   the   simple   random 
sampling.  This  method  requires  the  complete  information about the 
population. There should be a list of information of all the individuals of 
the population in any systematic way.  
Now we decide the size of the sample: 
Let the size of sample is = n and population size is = N 
Now  we  select  each  N/n  individual from  the  list  and  thus  we  have  the 
desired  size  of sample  which is  known  as systematic  sample. Thus  for 
this   technique of   sampling   population   should   be arranged   in any 
systematic way. 
Merits: 
1. This is a simple method of selecting a sample. 
2. It reduces the field cost. 
3. Inferential statistics may be used. 
4. Sample may be comprehensive and representative of population. 
5. Observations of the sample may be used for drawing conclusions 
and generalizations. 
Demerits: 
1. This  is  not  free  from  error,  since  there  is  subjectivity  due  to 
different ways of systematic list by different individuals. 
2. Knowledge of population is essential. 
3. Information of each individual is essential.. 

 
 
49 
4. This method can’t ensure the representativeness. 
5. There  is  a risk  in drawing  conclusions  from  the  observations  of 
the sample. 
 
(3) Stratified Sampling: 
It  is  an  improvement  over  the  earlier  methods.  When  we employ  this 
technique, the researcher divides his population into strata on the basis 
of  some  characteristics  and from  each of  these  smaller  homogenous 
groups (strata)  draws  at  random a predetermined  number of  units. 
Researcher  should  choose  that  characteristic  as  criterion which  seems 
to be more relevant in his research work. 
Stratified sampling may be of three types; 
(a) Disproportionate:  
Means  that the  size  of  the  sample  in  each  unit  is not  proportionate to 
the size of the unit but depends upon considerations involving personal 
judgement and convenience. This method of sampling is more effective 
for  comparing  strata which  have different  error possibilities.  It  is  less 
efficient for determining population characteristics. 
(b) Proportionate: 
It  refers  to  the  selection  from each  sampling  unit  of  a  sample that  is 
proportionate  to the  size of  the  unit.  Advantages  of    this  procedure  
includes representativeness with respect to variables used  as the basis  
of classifying  categories  and  increased chances  of being able to make 
comparisons  between  strata.  Lack  of  information  on  proportion  of the 
population in  each  category  and  faulty  classification  may  be listed  as 
disadvantages of this method. 
(c) Optimum allocation: 
Stratified sampling  is  representative  as  well  as  comprehensive  than 
other stratified  samples.  It  refers  to  selecting  units  from  each  stratum. 
Each stratum should be in proportion to the corresponding stratum the 

 
 
50 
population.  Thus  sample  obtained  is  known  as  optimum  allocation 
sample. 
Merits: 
(i) It is a good representative of the population. 
(ii) It is an improvement over the earlier technique of sampling. 
(iii) It is an objective method of sampling. 
(iv) Observations can be used for inferential purpose. 
Demerits: 
(i) Serious disadvantage of this method is that it is difficult for the 
researcher to decide the relevant   criterion for stratification. 
(ii) Only one criterion can be used for stratification, but generally it 
seems more than one criterion relevant for stratification. 
(iii) It is costly and time consuming method. 
(iv) Selected  samples  may  be  representative  with  reference to  the 
used criterion but not for the other. 
(v) There is a risk of generalization. 
 
(4)  Multiple or Double Repetitive Sampling: 
Generally  this  is not  a new  method  but  only  a  new  application  of  the 
samplings. This is most frequently used for establishing the reliability of 
a  sample. When  employing a  mailed  questionnaire, double  sampling is 
sometimes  used  to  obtain  a  more  representative  sample. This  is  done 
because  some  randomly  selected  subjects  who  are  sent  questionnaires 
may not return them.  
 Obviously,  the  missing  data  will  bias  the  result  of  the  study,  if 
the people who fail to reply   the query differ in some fundamental way 
from the others in respect to the phenomenon being studied. 
 To  eliminate  this  bias,  a  selected  sample  may  be  drawn  at 
random  from the  non-respondents  and  the  people interviewed  to 

 
 
51 
obtain  the desired  information.  Thus  this  technique  is  also  known  as 
repeated or multiple sampling. 
 This  double  sampling  technique  enables  one  to  check  on  the 
reliability  of  the  information  obtained  from  first  sample. Thus,  double 
sampling, where  in one sample is analyzed and information obtained is 
used to draw the next sample to examine the problem further. 
Merits: 
(i) Thus   sampling   procedure   leads   to   the   inferences   of   free 
determine precision based on a number of observations. 
(ii) This technique of sampling reduces the error. 
(iii) This  method  maintains the  procedure  of  the  finding  evaluate 
the reliability of the sample. 
Demerits: 
(i) This technique of sampling cannot be used for a large sample . It 
is applicable only for small sample. 
(ii) This technique is time consuming and costly. 
(iii) Its planning and administration is more complicated. 
 
(5) Multi Stage Sampling: 
This   sample   is   more   comprehensive   and   representative   of   the 
population. In  this type  of  sampling  primary  sample  units  are  inclusive 
groups  and secondary units are sub-groups  within  these ultimate units 
to be selected  which belong to one and only one group.  
 Stages  of  a  population  are  usually  available  within  a  group or 
population, whenever  stratification is  done  by  the  researcher.  The 
individuals  are  selected  from  different stages  for  constituting  the multi 
stage sampling. 
Merits: 
(i) It is a good representative of the population. 

 
 
52 
(ii) Multistage   sampling   is   an   improvement   over   the   earlier 
methods. 
(iii) It is an objective procedure of sampling. 
(iv) The  observations  from  multi  stage  sample  may  be  used  for 
inferential purpose. 
Demerits: 
(i) It is a difficult and complex method of sampling. 
(ii) It involves errors when we consider the primary stages. 
(iii) It is again a subjective technique of sampling. 
 
(6)  Cluster Sampling: 
To select the intact group as a whole is known as a cluster sampling. In 
cluster  sampling the  sample  units  contain  groups  of  element (cluster) 
instead  of  individual  members  or  items  in  the population. Rather  than 
listing  all  elementary  school  children  in  a  given  city  and  randomly 
selecting 15 % of these students for the sample, a researcher lists all of 
the  elementary  schools  in  the  city,  selects  at  random  15  %  of  these 
clusters  of  units,  and  uses  all  of  the children  in the  selected  schools  as 
the sample. 
Merits: 
(i) It may be a good representative of the population. 
(ii) It is an easy method. 
(iii) It is an economical method. 
(iv) It is practicable and highly applicable in education. 
(v) Observations can be used for inferential purpose. 
Demerits: 
(i) Cluster sampling is not free from errors. 
(ii) It is not comprehensive. 
 

 
 
53 
 
 
Non-Probability Sampling Method: 
Samples which  are  selected    through  non-random  methods  are called 
non probability samples. Depending upon the technique used it may be; 
 
(1)  Incidental or Accidental Sampling: 
The  term  incidental  or  accidental  applied  to  those  samples  that  are 
taken  because  they  are  most  frequently  available  i.e.  this  refers  to  the 
groups  which  are  used  as  samples  of  a  population    because    they  are 
readily available  or because  the researcher is unable to  employ more 
acceptable sampling methods. 
Merits: 
(i) It is very easy method of sampling. 
(ii) It is frequently used method in behavioural sciences. 
(iii) It  reduces  the  time,  money  and  energy  i.e.  it  is  an  economical 
method. 
Demerits: 
(i) It is not representative of the population. 
(ii) It is not free from errors. 
(iii) Parametric statistics cannot be used. 
 
(2)  Judgment Sampling: 
This involves the selection of a group from  the  population on the basis 
of  available  information  assuming  as  if  they  are  representative  of  the 
entire  population. Here  group  may  also  be  selected  on  the  basis  of 
intuition  or on  the  basis  of  the  criterion  deemed  to  be self-evident. 
Generally investigator   should   take   the judgment sample   so   this 
sampling is highly risky. 
 
 

 
 
54 
Merits: 
(i) Knowledge of investigator can be best used in this technique of 
sampling. 
(ii) This method of sampling is economical. 
Demerits: 
(i) This technique is objective. 
(ii) It is not free from errors. 
(iii) It includes uncontrolled variation. 
(iv) Inferential  statistics  cannot  be  used  for  the  observation  of  this 
sampling, so generalization is not possible. 
 
(3) Purposive Sampling: 
The purposive sampling  is selected  by some  arbitrary method because 
it is known  to be representative of the  total population, or it is known 
that  it  will  produce  well  matched  groups.  The  idea  is  to  pick  out  the 
sample in relation to  criterion which are considered  important for the  
particular  study. This  method  is  appropriate    when    the  study    places 
special emphasis  upon the control of certain specific variables. 
Merits: 
(i) Use   the   best   available   knowledge   concerning   the   sample 
subjects. 
(ii) Better control of significant   variables. 
(iii) Sample groups data can be easily matched. 
(iv) Homogeneity of subjects used in the sample. 
Demerits: 
(i) Reliability of the criterion is questionable. 
(ii) Knowledge of population is essential. 
(iii) Errors in classifying sampling subjects. 
(iv) Inability to utilize the inferential parametric statistics. 
(v) Inability to make generalization concerning total population. 
 

 
 
55 
(4) Quota Sampling: 
This combines both judgment sampling and probability sampling: on the 
basis   of   judgment   or   assumption   or   the   previous   knowledge,   the 
proportion   of   population   falling   into each   category is   decided. 
Thereafter  a  quota  of  cases  to  be  drawn  is fixed  and the  observer  is 
allowed to sample as he likes. Quota sampling is very arbitrary and likely 
to figure in municipal surveys. 
Merits: 
(i) It is an improvement over the judgment sampling. 
(ii) It is an easy  sampling technique. 
(iii) It is not frequently used in social surveys. 
Demerits: 
(i) It is not a representative sample. 
(ii) It is not free from errors. 
(iii) It has the influence of regional , geographical and social factors. 
 
(5) Snowball Sampling: 
The term;  snow ball sampling’ has been used to describe a sampling 
procedure  in  which  the sample  goes on becoming  bigger and  bigger  as 
the  observation  or  study  proceeds. The  term  snowball  stems  from  the 
analogy   of a snowball   sample which would   allow computation   of 
estimates of sampling error and use of statistical test of significance. 
 For example, an  opinion  survey  is  to  be  conducted on  smokers 
of  a  particular  brand  of  cigarette.  At  the  first stage, we  may  pick  up  a 
few people who are known to us or can be identified to be the smokers 
of that  brand. At  the  time  of interviewing  them, we  may  obtain  the 
names  of  other  persons known  to the  first  stage  subjects. Thus the 
subjects  go on  serving an  informant  for the  identification of  more 
subjects and the sample goes on increasing. 
 

 
 
56 
Merit: 
 Snowball  sampling  which  is  generally  considered  to  be  non-
probabilistic  can  be converted  into probabilistic  by  selecting  subjects 
randomly within each stage. 
 
Demerits:  
Sampling errors may creep in. 
 
(6) Purposive or Expert Choice Sampling: 
Samples   are   sometimes   expressly   chosen because, in   the light   of 
available information, these mirror some larger group with reference to 
one  or  more  given  characteristics. The  controls  in such  samples are 
usually  identified  as representative  areas (city,  country,  state,  district), 
representative  characteristics  of  individuals  (age,  sex,  marital  status, 
socio-economic    status,    race)   or    types   of    groups    (administrator, 
counselors, teachers etc.). 
 These   controls   may   be   further   sub-divided   by   specified 
categories within classes such as amount of training, years of experience 
or  attitudes  towards  a  specific  phenomenon.  Up-to  this stage, these 
controls  are somewhat  similar  to  those  used  in  satisfaction. Purposive 
sampling  differs  from  stratified  random  sampling  in  that  the  actual 
selection of the units to be included in the sample in each group is done 
purposively rather than by random method. 

 
 
57 
 
 
Tools of Data Collection 
 
A researcher requires many data – gathering tools or techniques. Tests 
are the  tools  of  measurement  and  it guides  the researcher in  data 
collection   and also   in evaluation. Tools   may   vary   in   complexity, 
interpretation, design and   administration. Each tool is suitable for the 
collection of certain type of information. 
 One  has  to select  from  the available  tools those which  will 
provide  data  he seeks  for testing  hypothesis. It  may happen  that 
existing  research tools  do not  suit  the  purpose in  some  situation,  so 
researcher should modify them or construct his own. 
Different tools used for data collection may be; 
1. Questionnaires 
2. Interviews 
3. Schedules 
4. Observation Techniques 
5. Rating Scales 
 
1. Questionnaire:  
It is list of questions related to one topic. It may be defined as; 
 
“A  questionnaire  is  a  systematic  compilation  of  questions  that  are 
submitted   to   a   sampling   of   population from   which information   is 
desired.”    
Barr, Davis & Johnson 
8 

 
 
58 
“In general,  the word  questionnaire  refers  to  a  device  for securing  
answers  to  questions  by  using    a  form    which  the  respondent  fills  in 
himself.” 
 W. J. Goode & K. Hall 
 
The questionnaire  is probably  most  used  and  most abused  of the  data 
gathering devices .It is easy to prepare and to administer. 
 The questionnaire  is a form prepared and distributed to secure 
responses  to certain  questions. It  is  a device  for securing  answers  to 
questions by using a form which the respondent will fill by himself. 
 It  is  a  systematic  compilation  of  questions.  It  is  an  important 
instrument  being  used  to  gather  information  from  widely  scattered 
sources. Normally  used  where  one  cannot  see  personally  all  of  the 
people from whom he desires responses or where there is no particular 
reason to see them personally. 
 
Characteristics of a Good Questionnaire: 
1. It deals with an important or significant topic. 
2. Its significance is carefully stated on the questionnaire itself or on its 
covering letter. 
3. It seeks only that data which cannot be obtained from the resources 
like books, reports and records. 
4. It is as short as possible, only long enough to get the essential data. 
5. It is attractive in appearance, nearly arranged and clearly duplicated 
or printed. 
6. Directions are clear and complete, important terms are clarified. 
7. The questions are objective, with no clues, hints or suggestions. 
8. Questions are presented in a order from simple to complex. 
9. Double negatives, adverbs and descriptive adjectives are avoided. 
10. Double barreled questions or putting two questions in one question 
are also avoided. 

 
 
59 
11. The questions carry adequate number of alternatives. 
12. It is easy to tabulate, summarize and interpret.  
Merits of Questionnaire Method: 
1. it’s very economical. 
2. It’s a time saving process. 
3. It covers the research in wide area. 
4. It’s very suitable for special type of responses. 
5. It is most reliable in special cases. 
Demerits of Questionnaire Method: 
1. Through this we get only limited responses. 
2. Lack of personal contact. 
3. Greater possibility of wrong answers. 
4. Chances of receiving incomplete response are more. 
5. Sometimes answers may be illegible. 
6. It may be useless in many problems. 
 
The Interview: 
Interview is a two way method which permits an exchange of ideas  and 
information. 
 
“Interviewing is fundamentally a process of social interaction.”  
W. J. Goode & P.K. Hatt 
“The interview constitutes a social situation between two persons, the 
psychological   process   involved   requiring   both   individuals   mutually 
respond  though  the  social  research  purpose  of  the  interview  call  for  a 
varied response from the two parties concerned.”    
                                                  Vivien Palmar 

 
 
60 
“The interview  may  be regarded  as a  systematic  method  by which  a 
person   enters more   or   less   imaginatively   into   the   inner   life   of   a 
comparative stranger.” 
                                                                                                            P.V. Young 
 
In an interview a rapport is established between the interviewer and the 
interviewee.  Not  only  is  physical  distance  between  them  annihilated, 
the social and cultural barrier is also removed; and a free mutual flow of 
ideas  to  and  fro  takes  place.  Both  create  their  respective  impression 
upon each other. 
 The  interview  brings  them  both  on  the  same  level  and  an 
emotional attachment supervenes between them. 
In  an  interview  all  formalities  are  laid  down  and  the  gate  is 
opened for delivering into the intellectuals, emotional and subconscious 
stirrings  of  the  interviewee. Thus here the ‘depth’ of subject (man) is 
gone  to  the  very  bottom  of  his  emotional  pool  and  may  check  his 
truthfulness of responses. 
 
Difference between Interview and Questionnaire 
Questionnaire Method Interview Method 
1. Data is gathered indirectly. 
2. No face to face contact between two. 
3. Interviewer should have the general 
knowledge of the topic. 
4. Interviwee will hesitate to write it. 
5. We get written information only. 
1. Data is gathered directly. 
2. There is face to face contact between 
interviewer and interviewee. 
3. Skillful interviewer is needed. 
4. Some confidential information can 
also be obtained. 
5. We get written and oral both type of 
information. 
 
 
Characteristics of an Interview: 
1. The  interviewer can  probe  into casual  factors,  determine  attitudes, 
discover the origin of problem. 

 
 
61 
2. Its appropriate to deal with young children and illiterates person. 
3. It can make cross questioning possible. 
4. It   helps   the   investigator   to   gain   an   impression   of   the   person 
concerned. 
5. It can deal with delicate, confidential and even intimate topics. 
6. It has flexibility. 
7. Sincerity, frankness, truthfulness and insight of the interviewee can 
be better judged through cross questioning. 
8. It gives no chance for respondent to modify his earlier answer. 
9. It   is   applicable   in   survey   method, but   it   is   also   applicable   in 
historical, experimental, case studies and clinical studies. 
Merits of Interview: 
1. Direct research. 
2. Deep research 
3. Knowledge of past and future. 
4. Knowledge of special features. 
5. Mutual encouragement is ossible. 
6. Supra-observation is possible. 
7. Knowledge of historical and emotional causes. 
8. Examination of known data. 
Disadvantage of Interview: 
1. May provides misleading information. 
2. Defects  due  to  interviewee(low  level  of  intelligence  or may  be 
emotionally unbalanced) 
3. Result may be affected due to prejudices of interviewer. 
4. Result  may  be  affected  due  to  the  difference  in  the  mental 
outlook of interwee and interviewer. 
5. One sided and incomplete research. 

 
 
62 
6. Art rather than science. 
Schedule: 
When a researcher is using a set of questionnaires for interview purpose 
it is known as schedule.  
 
“Schedule is the name usually applied to set of questions, which are 
asked  and  filled  by  an  interviewer  in  a  face  to  face  situation  with 
another.”  
W.J. Goode & P. K. Hatt 
By  a schedule  we cannot, however, obtain  information about  many 
things at once. It is best suited to the study of a single item thoroughly. 
 According   to Thomas   Carson   Macormie, “The schedule   is 
nothing more  than a list  of questions which, it  seems necessary  to test 
the hypothesis.” 
 Thus  schedule  is  a  list  of  questions  formulated  and  presented 
with the specific purpose of testing an assumption or hypothesis. 
In schedule method interview occupies a central and plays a vital role. 
 As  a  matter of  fact  success  in  the  use  of  schedule  is largely 
determined by the ability and tact of the interviewer rather than by the 
quality of the questions posed.  
 Because the  interviewer himself poses  the  questions and notes 
down  the answers  all  by himself, the quality  of  questions has  not  any 
great significance. 
 
Important Features of Schedule: 
1. The  schedule  is  presented  by  the  interviewer.  The  questions  are 
asked and the answers are noted down by him. 
2. The  list  of  questions  is  a  mere  formal document,  it need  not be 
attractive. 
3. The schedule can be used in a very narrow sphere of social research. 

 
 
63 
4. It  aids  to  delimit  the  scope  of  the  study  and  to  concentrate  on  the 
circumscribed elements essential to the analysis. 
5. It aims at delimiting the subject. 
6. In the schedule the  list of questions is preplanned and noted down 
formally  and  the  interviewer  is  always  armed  with  the  formal 
document detailing the questions. 
Thus interviewer not to depend upon the memory. 
Points to be kept in mind while designing schedule; 
1. Interviewer should not frame long, complex, defective questions. 
2. Unrelated and unnecessary questions should not be asked. 
3. Schedule should not contain personal and upsetting questions. 
4. Its questions should be simple, clear and relevant to topic. 
5. Questions be suitable to respondent’s intelligence level. 
6. Impersonal, indirect and unambiguous questions should be included 
in schedule. 
Merits of Schedule: 
1. Higher percentage of responses. 
2. Possible to observe personality factors. 
3. Through interview personal contact is possible. 
4. It is possible to give human touch to schedule. 
5. Removal of doubts is possible because face to face interaction is 
there. 
6. It is possible to know about the defects of the interviewee. 
 
Observation Technique: 
This is most commonly used technique of evaluation research. It is used 
for evaluating cognitive and non-cognitive aspects of a person. It is used 
in evaluation performance, interests, attitudes, values towards their life 
problems  and  situations.  It  is  most  useful  technique  for  evaluating  the 
behaviors of children. 

 
 
64 
It is technique of evaluation in which behavior are observed in a natural 
situations. 
 “It is thorough study based on visual observation. Under  this 
technique   group   behaviours and   social institutions   problems   are 
evaluated.”      
  C. Y. Younge 
 “Observation employs relatively more visual and senses than 
audio and vocal organs.”      
                                                                                     C.A. Mourse 
 The  cause- effect  relationship  and  study  of  events  in  original 
form, is known as observation. 
 Observation  seeks  to  ascertain  what  people  think  and  do  by 
watching them in action as they express themselves in various situations 
and activities. 
 Observation is recognized as the most direct means of studying 
people when one is interested in their overt behavior. 
 In  questionnaires  and  interview  people may  write  answer  as 
they  think,  they  do  but  this  is  often  different  from  what  they  actually 
do. These  restrictions are  missing in  observation  so  observation  is  a 
more   natural   way of   gathering   data.   Artificiality   and   formality   of 
questionnaires  and  interview is  replaced by  reality  and  informality  in 
observation. Data obtained through observation are more real and true 
than  the  data  collected  by  any  other  method. It  also  plays  a  particular 
part in survey procedure. 
 
Characteristics of Observation Schedule: 
According to Jahoda it has many characteristics; 
1. It serves a formulated research purpose. 
2. It is planned systematically rather than occurring haphazardly. 

 
 
65 
3. It   is systematically   recorded and   related   to   more general 
propositions. 
4. It  is  subjected  to  checks  and  controls  with  respect  to  validity  , 
reliability and precision. 
5. It  is  a  direct  technique  to  study  an  object,  an  event  or  a 
problem. 
6. It is based mainly on visual –audio scene. 
7. It employs own experiences. 
8. It establishes cause-effect relationship. 
9. It is an objective technique of data collection. 
10. It is both objective and subjective evaluation technique. 
11. It is formal as well as informal technique. 
12. It   is   quantitative   as   well   as   qualitative technique   for   data 
collection. 
Advantages: 
1. It   is   reliable   and   valid technique   of   collecting   data   and 
information. 
2. We get first hand data through this method. 
3. Record of observation is also available immediately. 
4. It is simple, broad and comprehensive method. 
5. It  is  an  oldest  technique  of  data  collection  and  getting  direct 
information. 
Limitations: 
1. It  has  a  limited  scope for  its  use  because  all the  events cannot 
be observed directly. 
2. It is subjective method. 
3. It is very time consuming process. 
4. Costly so energy consuming also. 

 
 
66 
5. Presence  of observer  influences  the  behavior of  the  person  i.e. 
subject becomes conscious. 
6. In  case  covert  behavior, which can’t be observed,  it is  not 
useful. 
7. Observer should be trained and experienced. 
Rating Scale: 
 Ratting is   term applied   to   express opinion   or judgment 
regarding some  situation,  object  or  character. Opinions  are  usually 
expressed  on a  scale  of values; rating  techniques  are  devices  by  which 
such judgments may be quantified.  
“Rating is an essence and direct observation.”  
Ruth Strong 
 “A rating scale ascertains the degree, intensity and frequency of 
a variable.”  
Von Dallen 
 Rating techniques are more commonly used in scaling traits and 
attributes. 
 A  rating  method  is  a  method  by  which  one  systematizes,  the 
expression of opinion concerning a trait.  
 The rating is done by parents, teachers, a board of interviewers 
and judges and even by the self as well. 
 The  special  feature  of  rating  scale  is  that  the  attitudes  are 
evaluated  not  on  the  basis  of  the  opinions  of  the  subjects but  on  the 
basis of the opinions and judgments of the experimenter himself. 
 In  rating  scale  data  are  collected  by; Verbal  behavior,  facial 
expression,   personal   documents,   clinical   type   interview,   projective 
techniques   and   immediate   experiences   as   emotions,   thoughts   and 
perceptions. 
Advantages: 
1. Writing reports to parents. 

 
 
67 
2. Filling out admission blanks for colleges. 
3. Finding out students’ needs. 
4. Making recommendations to employers. 
5. Supplementing other sources of under taking about child. 
6. Stimulating effect upon the rates. 
Limitations: 
1. Difference in rating abilities. 
2. Difference in reliability as subjects for rating. 
3. Agreement among raters of one type of contact only. 
4. Average superior than single. 
5. Impact of emotions. 
6. Limits of self-rating. 
7. Over rating. 
8. Limits of rating of specific qualities. 
9. Limits of justifications. 
Activities Involved in Data Collection: 
 Data must  be  collected and  recorded  in  a  form  suitable  for the 
intended  analysis. The  collection  of  data  requires  time and  substantial  
effort  for  acquiring  skills  and  making    the  necessary  arrangements  for 
collection  and to ensure adequate quality. 
Access to Data: 
 Generally  it is  a  problem  for  researcher  to  get  access  to  data 
because  the institutions  or  the persons  who  generally  control  the  data 
are  not  willing  to  provide  him  data  for  one  or  the  other  reason  or 
excuse. Some necessary steps are required to motivate such institutions 
or  persons  to  provide  necessary  data  willingly.  Some  educational 
problems  are  of  such  nature  that  the  subjects  specially  girls  are  not 
willing  to  disclose  correct  information.  Similarly  a  researcher  of  any 
board or university may not have access to confidential data. 

 
 
68 
Adequate Standard: 
The   researcher   should   demonstrate   that   his   data   were   properly 
collected. It is possible if the following conditions are fulfilled. 
(i) It  should  be  ensured  that  the  supplied  data  met  e  requirement  of 
validity. In other  words  the  data should,  ensure  what they  claimed 
to measure. 
(ii) Proper attention should be paid to measurement error.  
The following types of error are possible in data collection; 
(a) Errors    due    to malfunctioning    of measuring    equipment/ 
instrument. 
(b) Error of bias. 
(c) Deliberate falsehood. 
(d) Distortion of facts. 
(e) Random errors. 
(iii) It  should  be  ensured  that  a  suitable  sample  was  drawn  out  of  the 
population so that proper generalization could be made. 
(iv) It should also be checked that the data were properly recorded. The 
conditions under which the data were gathered should be  properly 
noted  and  suitable  data  recording  method  should  be  used. The 
efforts should be made to detect and eliminate errors arising during 
recording. The data  are generally recorded in the following forms; 
(a) notes of the researcher 
(b) Log  books  and  journals  are  used  by  a  researcher  doing  the 
experiment or conducting  a field study 
(c) Interview notes 
(d) Responses to questionnaires 
(e) Recording on tape recorder. 
(f)  Video cameras 
(g) Transcribing data for computer input 
 

 
 
69 
Data Organization: 
Whatever method is used for collection of data it will be necessary that 
an extensive  set of  supplementary  notes  should  be  made  for  the 
following; 
(a) Sources of data 
(b) Conditions under which data were gathered. 
 There should be stored in such a way as offer some reasonable 
prospects of retrieval when required. 
Collecting Primary Data and Secondary Data: 
The  primary  data  can  be  collected through  laboratory  measurement, 
field  observation,  questionnaires,  interviews,  opinionnaires,  schedules 
etc. 
 The secondary data can be collected from technical publications 
such  as  manuals,  handbooks,  data  sheets,  and  standards,  books  and 
journals,    official    publications    of    the    Central    government,    state 
governments,  local  bodies,  private  data  services  and  computer  data 
base. 
General Rules: 
There  are  some  general  rules  that  apply  to  all  types  of  data  collection. 
They are as follows; 
(i) Do  not  collect  more  information  than  is  required  for  the  research 
problem. 
(ii) Make  sure  the  wording  of  the  data  collection  instrument  is  clear  and 
unambiguous. 
(iii) Use clear and explicit instructions in data collection instruments. 
(iv) Design   the   response   options   as   carefully   as   the   items   stems 
themselves. 
(v) Make   responding   to   the   measuring   instrument   as   alternative   as 
possible. 
(vi) Make sure that the final products look professional. 

 
 
70 
 
 
Data Analysis 
 
Data   analysis   embraces   a   whole   range   of   activities   of   both   the 
qualitative  and  quantitative  type. It  is  usual  tendency  in  behavioral 
research  that  much  use  of  quantative  analysis  is  made  and  statistical 
methods  and  techniques  are  employed. The  statistical  methods  and 
techniques  are  employed. The statistical  methods and  techniques  have 
got  a  special position  in  research  because  they  provide  answers  to  the 
problems. 
 Kaul defines  data  analysis  as, ”Studying the organized material 
in  order  to  discover  inherent  facts. The  data  are  studied  from  as  many 
angles as possible to explore the new facts.” 
 
Purpose: 
The following are the main purposes of data analysis: 
 
(i) Description:  
It  involves  a  set  of  activities  that  are  as  essential  first  step  in  the 
development  of most  fields. A  researcher  must  be  able  to  identify  a 
topic  about  which  much  was  not  known;  he  must  be  able  to  convince 
others about its importance and must be able to collect data. 
 
(ii) Construction of Measurement Scale:  
The  researcher  should  construct  a  measurement  scale.  All  numbers 
generated  by  measuring  instruments  can  be  placed  into  one  of four 
categories: 
9 

 
 
71 
(a) Nominal: The number  serves as  nothing  more  than  labels. For 
example  no 1  was  not  less  than  no  2  .Similarly  no  2  was  neither 
more than no 1 and nor less than no 3. 
(b) Ordinal: Such  numbers  are  used  to  designate an  ordering along 
some  dimensions  such  as  from  less  to  more,  from  small  to  large, 
from sooner to later. 
(c) Interval: The  interval  provides  more  précised  information  than 
ordinal one. By this type of measurement the researcher can make 
exact and meaningful decisions. For example if A,B and C are of 150 
cm, 145cm and 140 cm height, the researcher can say that A is 5 cm 
taller than B and B is 5 cm taller than C. 
(d) Ratio Scale: It has two unique characteristics. The intervals between 
points can be demonstrated to be precisely the same and the scale 
has a conceptually meaningful zero point. 
 
(iii) Generating empirical relationships:  
Another  purpose  of  analysis  of  data  is  identification  of  regularities  and 
relationships  among  data. The  researcher  has  no  clear  idea  about  the 
relationship  which will be  found  from    the  collected  data.  If  the  data 
were  available  in  details  it  will  be  easier  to  determine  the  relationship. 
The  researcher  can  develop theories  if  he  is  able  to  recognize  pattern 
and  order  of  data.  The  pattern  may  be  showing  association  among 
variables, which may be done by calculating correlation among variables 
or  showing  order,  precedence  or  priority.  The  derivation  of  empirical 
laws may be made in the form of simple equations relating one interval 
or ratio scaled variable to a few others through graph methods. 
 
(iv) Explanation and prediction:  
Generally  knowledge  and  research  are  equated  with  the  identification 
of causal relationships and all research activities are directed to it. But in 
many fields  the research  has  not  been  developed  to the  level  where 

 
 
72 
causal explanation is possible or valid predictions can be made. In such a 
situation explanation and prediction is construct  as enabling the values 
of one set of variables to be derived given the values of another. 
Functions: 
The following are the main functions of data analysis: 
(i) The researcher should analyze the available data for examining 
the statement of the problem. 
(ii) The researcher should analyze the available data for examining 
each hypothesis of the problem. 
(iii) The  researcher  should  study the  original  records  of  the  data 
before data analysis. 
(iv) The  researcher  should analyze the  data  for  thinking about  the 
research problem in lay man’s term. 
(v) The researcher  should analyze the  data  by  attacking  it  through 
statistical calculations. 
(vi) The  researcher  should  think  in  terms  of  significant  tables  that 
the available data permits for the analysis of data. 
 
Statistical Calculations: 
The researcher will have to use either descriptive statistics or inferential 
statistics for the purpose of the analysis. 
 
(i) The descriptive statistics may be on any of the following forms: 
(a) Measures of Central Tendency:  
 These measures  are mean, median, mode  geometric mean and 
harmonic mean. In  behavioral  statistics  the  last  two measures  are not 
used.  Which  of  the  first  three  will  be  used  in  social  statistics  depends 
upon the nature of the problem. 
 

 
 
73 
 
(b) Measures of Variability:  
These  measures  are  range,  mean  deviation,  quartile  deviation  and 
standard  deviation.  In  social  statistics  the  first  two  measures  are  rarely 
used. The  use  of  standard  deviation  is  very  frequently  made  for  the 
purpose of analysis. 
 
(c) Measures of Relative Position:  
These  measures  are standard  scores (Z  or  T  scores), percentiles and 
percentile ranks  .All  of  them  are  used  in  educational  statistics  for data 
analysis. 
 
(d) Measures of Relationship:  
There  measures  are  Co-efficient  of  Correlation,  partial  correlation  and 
multiple correlations. All  of  them  are  used  in  educational statistics  for 
the analysis of data. However the use  of rank method is made  more  in 
comparison to Karl pearson method. 
 
(ii)The inferential statistics may be in any one of the following forms: 
(a) Significance of Difference between Means: 
It  is  used  to  determine  whether  a true  difference exists  between 
population means of two samples. 
 
(b) Analysis of Variance:  
The Z or t tests are used to determine whether there was any significant 
difference  between  the  means  of  two  random  samples.  The  F  test 
enables  the  researcher  to  determine  whether  the  sample  means  differ 
from  one  another  to a  greater  extent  then  the  test  scores  differ  from 
their own sample means using the F ratio. 

 
 
74 
(c) Analysis of Co-Variance:  
It  is  an  extension  of  analysis  of  variance  to  test  the  significance  of 
difference  between  means  of  final  experimental  data  by  taking  into 
account  the  Correlation  between  the  dependent  variable  and one  or 
more  Co-variates  or control  variables  and  by  adjusting  initial  mean 
differences in the group. 
 
(d) Correlation Methods:  
Either  of  two  methods  of  correlation  can  be  used  for  the  purpose of 
calculating  the  significance  of  the  difference  between  Co-efficient of 
Correlation. 
 
(e) Chi Square Test:  
It is used to estimate the like hood that some factor other than chance 
accounts   to   the   observed   relationship. In   this   test   the      expected 
frequency and observed frequency are used for evaluating Chi Square. 
 
(f) Regression Analysis: 
For calculating the probability of occurrence of any phenomenon or for 
predicting the phenomenon or relationship between different variables 
regression analysis is cone. 

 
 
75 
 
 
Interpretation of Data 
 
According to F.L. Whitney, interpretation means an adequate exposition 
of the true meaning of the material presented in terms of the purposes 
of  the  study  being  reported  and  of  the  chapter  and  section  topic 
involved. 
 
Purposes: 
The following are the main purposes of interpretation of data or results; 
(i) To  throw  light  on  the  real  significance  of  the  material  in  the 
context. 
(ii) To understand implications of the data. 
(iii) To  provide  hints  of  conclusions  and  recommendations  of  the 
researcher. 
(iv) To show the values of greatest worth that has resulted from the 
research. 
(v) To refer important generalization. 
 
Factors: 
The  researcher  should  keep  the  following  factors  in  consideration  in 
interpretation of data; 
 
(i) Not to ignore those factors which are unstudied: 
In  social  /  behavioral  researches  there  are  many  factors  which  have 
their  impact  upon  the  findings  of  the  research  but  no  researcher  is  in 
the position  to study  all  the  factors. Naturally  he  does  not  take  into 
account  in  interpretation  of  the results  those  factors  which  have  not 
10
0 

 
 
76 
been  studied. It  has  its  effect  upon the  search  of  truth.  Thus  the 
researcher    should    take    into    consideration    such    factors    in    his 
interpretation. For  example  if  a  comparison  has  been  made  between 
the traditional method of teaching and any modern method of teaching 
in respect of effectiveness of teaching, the interpretation that successful 
attainment is the result of method of teaching only is complete denial of 
the  role  of  general  mental  ability,  high  achievement motivation  and 
better study habits etc.  
 
(ii) Not to ignore those factors which have not been selected for study: 
In social / behavioral researches, the subjects are generally so large that 
the   researcher collects   the   data   from   a   selected   group   only.   The 
researcher  should  remember  that  some  factors  which  have  not  been 
included in  selective  group are  equally  important  in  their impact  upon 
findings. For example if  the  researcher  collects  data  from  a particular 
school   in   a   particular   area   and   then   he   concludes   about all   the 
schools/colleges. 
 
(iii) Not to over –interpret the expected results: 
The  researcher should  remember that  even  if  he  finds  the  findings of 
the research as per his expectations he should not   interpret more than 
what  can  be  interpreted  on  the  basis  of  data  available. The  researcher 
should  be  cautious  that  he  reports  all  such  factors  which  might  be 
responsible for the findings. 
 
(iv) Not to exercise defense mechanism in interpreting the results: 
The  researcher  should  remember  that  it  is  not  necessary  that  the 
hypotheses   should   always   be   confirmed. It   is   possible   that   the 
researcher  may  exercise defense mechanism if  the  results  of  the  study 
are not found as per expectations of the research. In such a situation he 
should not try to find faults in tools or samples for the results against his 

 
 
77 
expectations. If any researcher tries to do so, his interpretation will not 
be  considered  fair.  The  hypotheses  are  made  in  the  beginning  of  the 
research  when  the  knowledge  of  the  researcher about  the  problem  is 
very limited. Agreement  between  the  tentative  and  the  results  is  not 
necessary.  

 
 
78 
 
 
Research Methods 
 
Historical Research Method: 
 
History  is  the  record  of  the  changing  processes. History  consists  of 
changes  which  social  structures  undergo. Social scientists studies the 
past  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the  present  state  of  affairs. 
History is the meaningful record of man’s achievement. It is not merely 
a list of   characteristics of   chronological   events,  but   an   integrated 
account of the relationship between persons, events, times and places. 
 John W. Best, “Man uses history to understand the past, and try 
to understand    the present    in the    light    of    past    events    and 
developments.” 
 F.N.  Kerlinger, “Historical research  is the application  of the 
scientific method of inquiry to historical problems.” 
 Whitney,  “Historical research deals with the past 
experiences....its aim is to apply the method of reflective thinking   of 
social problems , still unsolved , by means of discovery  of past trends of 
event,  fact  and  attitude.  It  traces  the  lines  of development  in human 
thought and action in order to reach some basis for social activity.” 
 Redcliff  Browne, “Historical    method  may  be  defined  as  a 
system  in  which  present  day  events  are  studied  with  reference  to  the 
events that took place in the past.” 
 Historical  method  seeks  to  find explanation  of questions  of 
current  interest  by  an  intensive  study  of  the  past. Many  studies  in  the 
field  of  economics,  politics, sociology,  education  and  psychology  are 
essentially historical in approach. 
11
0 

 
 
79 
Purpose of Historical Research: 
(i) Historical researches provide important information concerning 
the  effects  of  certain  past  practices  and  may  suggest  plans  for 
future actions. 
(ii) It  also  offers explanation of  the how  and  why  of  many  of  the 
theories  and practices that  has developed  and  now prevails in 
the school/college. 
(iii) It  contributes  to  an  understanding  of  the significance  of the 
phenomenon studied. 
(iv) It helps to gain an accurate account of the past. 
(v) It helps to gain a clear perspective of the present. 
 
Sources of Historical Research: 
There    are    many    sources    for    collection    of    historical    data    like; 
Autobiographies,   Diaries,   Confessions,   Memories,   Personal   letters, 
Accessible documents,    news-papers    and    literature,    books    and 
Magazines,  Cultural  and  Analytical  history  material,  Artistic  materials, 
historical paintings, Portraits , charts etc. 
 These  sources  can  be  divided  into  two  categories  i.e.  Primary 
sources and Secondary sources. 
 
Primary sources: 
The original  documents  are  termed  as  Primary  sources. These  are solid 
basis of historical research and are highly prized by a historian. 
 According to Kerlinger, “A primary source is the only repository 
of  an  historical  datum,  like  an  original  record  kept  of  an  important 
occasion, an eye witness description of an event, a photograph, minutes 
of organization meeting and so on.” 
 

 
 
80 
(i) Document or records:  
These are maintained and written by actual participant or witness of an 
event.  These  sources  are  produced  for  the  purpose  of  transmitting 
information  to  be  used  in  the  future. Documents  classified  as  primary 
sources  are constitution,  charters, laws, court  decisions,  diaries,  deeds, 
genealogies, contracts, wills, autobiographies, letters, official minutes or 
records,     permits, licenses,     affidavits,     depositions,     declarations, 
proclamations certificates, lists, bills, handbills, receipts, 
newspapers,magazines,accounts,maps,diagrams,books,pamphlets,catal
ogues,films,pictures,paintings,recordings,transcriptions    and    research 
reports.  
 
(ii) Remains or Relics: 
These  are  associated  with  a  person,  group, period, fossils, skeletons, 
tools, weapons, food  utensils, clothing,  buildings, furniture,  coins,  art 
objects, pictures and paintings are examples of relics. 
 
(iii) Oral Testimony:  
These  are  spoken  account  of  witness  or  participant  in  an  event.  It  is 
obtained in a personal interview. It may be recorded or transcript as the 
witness relates his experiences. 
 
Secondary Sources of Data:  
In  the  words of Kerlinger, “A secondary source is an account or record 
of an historical event or circumstance one or more steps removed from 
an original history.” 
 Secondary  sources  are  the  reports  of  a  person  who  relates  the 
testimony of actual witness of, or participant in an event. The writer of 
the  secondary  source  who  was  not  on  the  scene  of the  event, merely 

 
 
81 
reports  what  the  person  who  was there  said  or  wrote. Most  history 
books and encyclopedias are the examples of secondary source. 
 
Characteristics of Historical Method: 
(i) Historical method is universal. 
(ii) Historical method involves very deep and intensive  investigation 
of material that already exists. 
(iii) Historical facts cannot be repeated in an accurate fashion as can 
be done in laboratory observation. 
(iv) Only such problems which are based on historical records can be 
investigated by following this approach. 
(v) Historical  approach  to research  is  the  application  of  scientific 
method to historical problems. 
(vi) In Historical Method   hypothesis may or  may not be formulated   
depending upon the nature of the research. 
(vii) The  interpretation  of  data  entirely  depends  upon  the  topic  of 
research.     
 
Approaches to Historical Research: 
 
1. Perspective Approach:  
It means  to study  the  events  from  the  past    towards  present. It  is 
ancient   approach.   Ancient   approach   was   to   study   the   political 
personality approach. 
2. Retrospective Approach:  
It means to study the events of present and proceed to past events. It is 
a recent approach to study the phenomena in social milieu. 
 
 

 
 
82 
Types of Historical Research: 
(1) Approach:  
An example is the pragmatic approach used by Karl max to arrange facts 
of history to support his concept of socialism. 
(2) Subject:   
It  includes  the bibliography  of  a  given  person, monography  of a  town, 
state, nation  or  civilization  or  slightly  higher  level  the  history  of  ideas, 
institutions or trends. 
(3) Technique: It is based either on documents or relics. 
(4) Classical studies 
(5) Documentary research: It considers only documents. 
(6) Bibliographical research:  
It includes history of a unit. (nation, person, culture)  
(7) Legal Research 
 
The Steps of Historical Research: 
(1) Identification and Definition of the Problem: 
It  involves  not only  the  location of the  problem  ,  which  has  a  historical 
significance, but also the availability of adequate data.  
(2) Collection of Data:  
It  may  involve anything  from digging  up  ancient  ruins  to  stumbling  on 
old  documents or  remains.  Most  educational  data  have  to  be  gathered 
in  the  routine  fashion  by  giving  minutes  of  meetings,  diaries  etc. Data 
are collected by two sources: primary or secondary. 
(3) Criticism of Data:  
The establishment of the validity of data involves a dual process, of first 
establishing  the  authenticity  of  the  sources  and  then  the  validity  of  its 
content. 
 

 
 
83 
(4) Interpretation of Data:  
This  should  be  made  from  the  standpoint  of  a  hypothesis  or  theory  of 
the  data. Data  should  be  considered  in  relation  to  one  another  and 
synthesized into a generalization or conclusion which places the overall 
significance in focus. 
 
Limitations of Historical Research: 
1. It is very difficult to study historical events on the basis of cause-
effect relationship. 
2. Many obstacles hinder the objectivity of the study. 
3. The investigator must have a special historical perspective. 
4. The importance of historical research has declined due to use of 
scientific method in social sciences. 
 
Guidelines of Historical Research: 
1. Primary sources should be used as extensively as possible. 
2. Personal  bias  should  not  be   allowed  to  influence  research 
procedure. 
3. Proper  recognition  should  be  given  to  the  inter-relationship  of 
education with other social institutions and forces. 
4. Words  and expressions  should  be  interpreted  in  the  light of 
their usages in earlier times. 
5. Various   facts   should   be   synthesized   and   integrated   into 
meaningful generalization. 
6. Significant  facts  must  be  distinguished  from  trivial facts  in a 
situation. 

 
 
84 
 
 
Descriptive or Survey Method 
 
The  term  survey  is  used  for  the  techniques  of investigation  by a  direct 
observation  of a  phenomenon or  a systematic gathering  of data  from 
population by applying personal contact and interviews when adequate 
information  about certain problem  is  not  available  in  records, files  and 
other sources. 
 The  survey  is  an  important  tool  to  gather  evidences  relating  to 
certain  social  problems. The  term  social  survey  indicates  the  study  of 
social  phenomena through  a  survey of  a  small  sampled population  and 
also  to  broad  segments of population. It  is  concerned with  the present 
and   attempts   to   determine   the   status  of   the   phenomenon   under 
investigation.  
 
Definitions: 
“A social survey is a process by which quantitative facts are  collected 
about the social aspects of a community composition and activities.” 
 A. F. Well 
“The survey is in briefly a method of analysis in scientific and orderly 
form  for  defined  purpose  of  given  social  situation  of  problem  and 
population.”  
S. Herman 
Objects of Social Survey: 
(i) Direct and close contact of researcher to the  phenomenon under 
study. 
(ii) To collect general information. 
(iii) A basis for hypothesis. 
12 

 
 
85 
(iv) To explain cause and effect relationship. 
(v) To know opinion and attitudes of the people. 
 
Purposes: 
(i) It provides  necessary  information  which  helps  the  administrator 
for making decisions. 
(ii) It provides necessary information and plan for improvement so it 
is forward-looking. 
(iii) It interprets, synthesizes  and integrates  data and points  out  their 
implications. 
(iv) It is more realistic because investigation is done in this method in 
natural setting. 
(v) It is the only method through which the researcher can obtain the 
opinions, attitudes and suggestions for improvement. 
(vi) It is useful in the development of research tools such as checklists, 
questionnaires etc. 
 
Types of Descriptive Method: 
Descriptive method is divided into four parts. They are; 
 

 
 
86 
 
 
The Survey Studies: They are of following types; 
 
The Inter-relationship Studies  are of following types; 
 
The Developmental Studies are of the following types; 
 
 
The  Content  Analysis deals  with  the  nature  utility  and  procedure  of 
content analysis. The important problems in this area are as follows; 
(i) Developing and modifying curriculum. 
(ii) Developing a standardized test in any subject. 
(iii) Differentiating aspects of different writing styles. 
Characteristics of Survey Method: 
(i) Social survey is confined to the study of specific current problems 
of society eg poverty, unemployment etc. 
(ii) A  survey  research  is  planned  collection  of  data  for  prediction  of 
relations between the variables. 
(iii) Survey  is  concerned  with  large  or  widely  dispersed  group  of 
peoples contrasted with the lab experiments. 

 
 
87 
(iv) Under this   method   observation,   interviews, attitude   scales, 
projective  techniques,  small  scale  experiments  etc. are  used  to 
collect data. 
(v) The  facts  collected  here  may  form  the  basis  of  further  social 
researches. 
Planning a Survey Method: 
The following are the steps which are involved in survey methods; 
(i) Select a problem. 
(ii) Preliminary or pilot study should be done. 
(iii) General and Specific objectives of the study are to be framed. 
(iv) It   should   be   determined   that   for   which   of   the   variables,  
identified in the problem whether; adequate techniques for data 
collection  are  available,  and  if  not  then  is  it  possible  for  the 
researcher to design them. 
(v) Population   should   be   identified   and representative sample 
should be selected. 
(vi) Data collection design should be prepared. 
(vii) The data should be collected. 
(viii) The data should be analyzed. 
(ix) The  report should  be  prepared  which  should  have  descriptive 
past, comparative or evaluative past and findings. 
Merits of Survey Methods: 
(i) Direct and close contact between researcher and respondents. 
(ii) Greate objectivity. 
(iii) Testing the validity of theories. 
(iv) Formulation and testing of hypothesis. 
(v) Social surveys are based on actual observation. 
(vi) It has universal application. 

 
 
88 
Limitations: 
(i) Survey method is costly, time consuming and wasteful in certain 
cases where the objectives are limited. 
(ii) The survey method is unsuitable if the numbers of persons to be 
surveyed   are very   large   or   if   they   spread   over   a   large 
geographical area. 
(iii) In this method personal bias may vitiate the result. 
(iv) It lacks the flexibility. 
(v) In  this method,  it is  very  difficult  to  verify  the  accuracy  of  the 
data collection. 
(vi) Only useful for current problems. 
(vii) It  does  not  permit  more  comprehensive  and  dynamic  study  of 
the   society   but   deals   with         the   problems   of   immediate 
importance only. 
(viii) Under this method most of the surveys are conducted on sample 
basis. If  the  sample  is  not  carefully  planned,  inferences  drawn 
may be inaccurate and misleading. 

 
 
89 
 
 
 Experimental Method 
 
It  may  be  defined  as  the  study  of  the  relationships  among  variables-
those   manipulated   and   those   measured. It   simply   enables   the 
researcher   to   improve   the   conditions   under   which   the   researcher 
observes  and thus to arrive  at  a more precise results. It enables him to 
relate  a  given  consequent to  a  specific  antecedent rather  than to  a 
vague conglomeration of antecedents. 
 It is a scientific method; give more precise, accurate and reliable 
results. It is just  like an observation under controlled conditions. It  acts 
on  the  law  of  single  variable  and  causing  factors.  It  studies  cause  and 
effect  relationship. It  is  a  systematic  and  logical  method  for  answering 
the  questions. In  this  the  researcher  seeks  to evaluate  something  new. 
It leads to contribution to the already acquired fund of knowledge. The 
three  essential  elements  in  an  experiment are;  control,  manipulation 
and  observation. In  this, experimentor  has  to  imagine  that  research 
conditions are  entirely new, they  were  not  existing  previously  and 
recently. It  is  a  method  in  which  we  study  the  effect  of  d  dependent 
variable   on   independent   variable. Whatever   we   know   about   the 
environment, is  possible  only  by  observation. All  types  of  experiments 
are related with observation and generalization of these observed facts 
and it is also possible to test the internal validity. 
 
Definitions: 
“It is a method of testing hypothesis.”  
Jhoda 
13
0 

 
 
90 
“An experiment is an observation under controlled conditioned.”  
F. S. Chapin 
“Experimental research is the description and analysis of what will be or 
what will occur, under carefully controlled condition.”  
John W. Best 
“Experiment is a means of providing the hypothesis whereby the causal  
relations between two facts is studied.”  
 Green Wood 
“The essence of an experiment may be described as observing the effect 
on   a   dependent   variable   of   the   manipulation   of   an   independent 
variable.”   
Festinger 
Characteristics: 
(i) Based on the law of single variable. 
(ii) This  method  of  research  is  maximum in  use  in  educational  / 
social researches where the factors can be controlled.  
(iii) Experimental  method  is  a  method  of  testing  of  clear  specific 
hypothesis of different intensions. 
(iv) It is a bias free estimation of the true effect. 
(v) It  emphasizes  control  of  conditions  and  the  experimentation  of 
certain variables in controlled conditions. 
(vi) It  sets  out  more  or  less  of  the  causal  type  relationship  between 
the phenomenons. 
(vii) It  uses  standardized  tool  for  experimentation  and  makes  the 
evidences very much objective. 
(viii) The  sample  is  selected  with  great  precaution  and  very  care  is 
taken to safe guard extraneous factors. 
(ix) This method helps in developing laws, postulate and theories. 
(x) It allows for precision and definiteness. 

 
 
91 
Elements: 
(1) Control: The extent to which different factors are accounted for  
(a) Purposes of Control: 
(i) Intervening  variables  are  isolated  so  that  they  may  effect  the 
dependent variable. 
(ii) Not    only    intervening    variables    are    to    be isolated    from 
independent variables but it is also to be ascertained how much 
it contributed. 
(iii) The  magnitude  is  not  only  ascertained  terms  of  larger  or  small 
but also in quantitative terms. 
(b) Degree of Control:  
It has to be remembered that in social researches high degree of control 
is not possible as in laboratory situation. 
(c) Methods of Control:  
The  researcher  directs efforts  towards controlling  the  variables  which 
are related  to the independent  variable otherwise  it will  be  difficult  to 
ascertain which is responsible for effect on dependent variable. 
 
The following methods are used for controlling; 
(i) Random assignment of subjects to groups: 
It  means  that  subjects  are  assigned  in  such  a  way  that  every  member 
has an equal opportunity of being chosen. 
(ii) Matching subjects with random assignment:  
The subjects are assigned to groups to match individual’s subjects on as 
many extraneous variable as the  researcher can  identify. They may be; 
(a)  Subject to  subject  matching, (b)  matching  for  mean  and  standard 
deviation,(c)Ranking of subjects on matching variable. 
 
 

 
 
92 
(iii) Random assignment on the basis of homogeneous selection:  
It is done to make groups comparable on an extraneous variable so as to 
select groups those are as homogenous as possible on the variable. The 
variable may be like socio-economic –status and sex etc. 
(iv)Techniques of analysis of Co-variance:  
It is attempted to control the variation within the groups .A co-variate is 
a variable which the researcher has not been able to control. 
(v) Methods of using subjects as their own controls:  
It  is  done  to  assign  the  same  subjects  to  two  experimental  treatments 
and then to obtain measurements of the subjects under one treatment 
and then on the other. But there is practical difficulty in this method in 
some cases. 
 
(2) Manipulation:  
In  the  experimental  method  manipulation  is  done  to  set  the  stage  for 
the occurrence of the factor whose performance is to be studied under 
conditions in which all other factors are controlled. Variables which can 
be manipulated  may be  personality characteristics,  attitudes,  teaching 
methods, type of motivation etc. 
 
(3) Observation:  
Another element  of  the  experimental  method  is  that  the  effect  of  the 
manipulation  of  independent  variable  on  the  dependent  variable  is 
studied   or   observed. The   technique   of   observation   is   applied   if 
measurement is not possible. 
 
(4) Replication: 
In   spite of   attempts   of   controlling   extraneous   variables,   some 
extraneous  variable  and  some  discrepancies remain  and influence  the 

 
 
93 
results.  Thus  replication  is  a  matter  of  conducting  a  number  of  sub-
experiments within the frame work of an overall experiment design.    
 
Features: 
(i) It is based on law of the single variable. It means if one element 
is  added  or  subtracted  in  one  of  the  two  situations  and  other 
situation  is  kept  as  it  is,  the  change  in  the  two  situations  is  the 
result of that single variable. 
(ii) It  is  applicable  when  significant  factor  or  conditions  can  be 
controlled. 
(iii) It is not a perfectly precise method in educational research as in 
scientific method. 
(iv) Control group and experimental group are never identical as they 
should be for an exact experiment. 
 
Experimental Validity: 
Two types of validity are involved; 
(i) Internal Validity:  
It  is  the  minimum  without  which  an  experiment  is  useless.  The  crucial 
point  is  whether  the  independent  variable  created  the  effect  on  the 
dependent   variable. It   means   that   some   uncontrolled   extraneous 
factors   do   not   affect the   dependent   variable. The   following   eight 
extraneous factors are to be controlled for obtaining internal validity; 
a) Contemporary confounding factor.  
b) Maturation of the subject with the passage of time, 
c) Experience in pre-test reflecting itself in the post test, 
d) Change in the calibration of the measuring instruments, 
e) Tendency for extreme scores to regress towards the mean, 

 
 
94 
f) Difference  in  the  selection  of  subject  in  the  pre-test  and post-
test, 
g) Differential  loss  of  subjects  from  the  experimental  and  control 
groups tend to bias the results of the experiment, 
h) Interaction   of   selection   and   maturation   and   selection   and 
history. 
 
(ii) External Validity:  
The  crucial  point  is  what  is  the  applicability  of  the  findings  beyond  the 
limits  of particular  experiment. Are  the  results  valid  in  general  for 
students? The  following  factors  are  to  be  controlled  for  obtaining 
external validity; 
a) Selections  of  sample  with  some  special  characteristics  make the 
application restrictive. 
b) Pre-testing may sensitize the subject to the experimental factor. 
c) Effects of  experimental  procedures  restrict  the  generalize  ability 
of the findings. 
d) Effects  of  a  treatment  on  a  subject  previously  exposed  to  other 
treatments cannot be generalized to other subjects who have not 
undergone the same sequence of treatments. 
Types of Experimental Designs: 
It is to the researcher what a blue –print is to an architect. The following 
are the factors upon which the selection of designs depends; 
(i) What is the nature of the experiment? 
(ii) What is the main purpose of the experiment? 
(iii) What types of the variables are to be manipulated? 
(iv) What is the nature of data? 
(v) What is the competence level of the experimentor? 
 

 
 
95 
The experimental designs are classified as follows; 
(a) Pre-experimental designs: 
In  this  type  of  design  there  is  no control  over extraneous  or  situation 
variables. They are divided into the following categories; 
 
Design No.1: 
One Group, Pre-test –Post-test Design 
Pre-test Independent Variable Post-test 
T
1 
X T
2 
 
Since  there  is  no  control  group  in  this  research  design  it  cannot  be 
checked whether the obtained result is due to treatment or extraneous 
variables. 
Design No.2:  
Two Group, Static Design 
Group Independent Variable Post-test 
Experimental  T
2
 
Control  T
2
 
 
In  this  design,  the  two  groups  are  assigned  but  neither  on  the  basis  of 
randomization  nor  matching. There  is  no  pre-test  so  the  researcher 
cannot measure the  difference on account of treatment. In this design, 
comparison is made on the basis of post-test, in experimental group and 
control group. 
 
(b)True-experimental designs:  
In  these  designs,  the researcher  attempts to control  the effects  of 
history, maturation, testing, measuring instruments etc. 
 
 
 

 
 
96 
Design No.3: 
Two groups, Randomized Subject, Post –test only Design 
Randomly assigned Group Independent Variable Post-test 
Experimental  T
2 
Control  T
2 
 
In this design, there is provision of randomization of subjects to the two 
groups,  it  assures  the  equivalence  of  groups  and  since  there  is  no 
provision of pre-test there is probability of interaction effect. However, 
the  use  of  the  designs  restricts  the  external  validity  of  the  experiment. 
There  are some  situations  which  do  not  permit  selection  of  subjects  at 
random. 
 
DesignNo.4:  
Two groups, Randomized Matched Subjects, Post-test only Design 
Randomly assigned group after 
matching 
Independent 
Variable 
Post-test 
Experimental  T
2 
Control  T
2 
 
This design is the most useful where small groups are to be used. In this 
design   the   subjects are   randomly   assigned   to   two   groups   after 
matching, it ensures strengths to design. 
 But  it  is  very  difficult  to  match  the  subjects  with  precision 
because  it  reduces  the  sizes  of  the  sample.  In  some  cases  it  is  not 
possible  to  match  one  or  more  potential  subjects. If  some  subjects  are 
to be reduced for this purpose, a bias is introduced in the sample. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
97 
Design No.5: 
Randomized groups—Pre-test, Post-test Design 
Randomly assigned Pre-test Independent Variable Post-test 
Experimental group T
1
   E  T
2
   E 
Control group T
1
  C  T
2
    C 
 
In   this   design   additional   check   is   provided   for   the   equality   of 
Experimental group and control group because there is provision of pre-
test. The  nature  of  the  design  is  such  that  it  controls  most  of  the 
extraneous variables. 
 However,  the  design  has  certain  limitations. Firstly  interaction 
between  pre-test  and  treatment  may  sensitize  subjects  which  may 
affect  the  results. Secondly, interaction  of  experimental  variable with 
other  factor  limits  its  generalization.  Thirdly,  experimental  procedure 
may affect normalcy. 
 
Design No.6: 
The Randomized Solomon Three Group Design 
Randomly assigned Pre-test 
Independent 
Variable 
Post –test 
Experimental group(E) T
1
  E  T
2
  E 
Control group  1(C
1
) T
1
  C
1 
 T
2
  C
1
 
Control group 2 (C
2
) No Pre-test  T
2
  C
2
 
 
In  this  design  check  is  provided  for  the  equality  of  Experimental  group 
and  control  group  because  there  is  provision of  pre-test. The  nature  of 
the design is such that it controls most of the extraneous variables. The 
provision of the second control group ensures control interaction effect 
of Pre-test and treatment.  
 
 

 
 
98 
Design No.7: 
The Randomized Solomon Four Group Design 
Randomly assigned Pre-test 
Independent 
Variable 
Post-test 
Experimental group(E) T
1
  E  T
2
  E 
Control group 1(C
1
) T
1
  C
1
  T
2
  C
1
 
Control group 2 (C
2
) No Pre-test  T
2
  C
2
 
Control group 3(C
3
) No Pre-test  T
2
  C
3
 
 
In  this  stage  check  is  provided  for  equality  of  Experimental  group  and 
control group, because  there is provision of pre-test. The nature of the 
design  is such  that  it  controls  most  of  the  extraneous  variables. The 
provision of the second control ensures control interaction effect of pre-
test  and  treatment. The  design  controls  any  possible  contemporary 
effects   between   pre-test   and   post-test. The result   in   this   design 
provides greater confidence. 
 However  this design  is  such  that  it  is  difficult  to  conduct  in 
practical  situation. There  is  a  difficulty  of  statistical  application  in  this 
design. 
 
(C) Factorial Design:  
This design enables the experimenter to evaluate or manipulate two or 
more experimenter to  evaluate  or  manipulate  two  or  more  variables 
simultaneously  in order to  study the effects  of  number  of  independent 
factors singly as well as the effects due to interactions with one another. 
Design No.8: Single Factorial Design of 2 2 
There  are  two  independent  variables  and  each  of the  independent 
variables   has   two values.   The first   independent   variable   which   is 
manipulated and has two values is called the experimental variable. The 
second  independent  variable  which  is  divided  into  levels may  be  called 
control variable. 

 
 
99 
In  this  design  the impact of  more  than  one  variable  can  be  studied 
simultaneously.   In this   not   only   the   significance   of   difference   of 
different levels is studied but interaction effect can also be studied. 
However,  if  too  many  variables and  two  many  levels  are  studied,  the 
experiment and statistical analysis becomes too difficult to manage. 
 
Steps of Experimental Research Methods: 
The  procedures  of  the experimental  method  are  to  be  executed  under 
the following steps; 
(i) Identifying, defining and delimiting the problem:  
The  problem  that  can  be  verified  or  refuted  by  the  experimental  data 
should be  selected first. The  variables to be  investigated are defined in 
operational terms. 
(ii) Reviewing the literature:  
After  selecting  the  problem,  the  related  literature  and  experiments 
should be reviewed and the method of approach or experimental design 
to be pursued should be planned or outlined. 
(iii) Formulating the hypothesis and deducing their consequences:  
The problem has to be converted into a hypothesis that can be verified 
or refuted by experimental method. 
(iv) Drawing up the experimental design:  
This  section  should  place primary emphasis on  the question of  control, 
randomization,  replication,  place  of  the experiment,  duration  of  the 
experiment,  selecting  or constructing  and validating  instruments  to 
measure  the outcomes  of the experiment  and conducting pilot for trial 
run tests to perfect instrument. 
(v) Defining the population:  
It is necessary to define the population precisely so that there can be no 
question about population to which the conclusions are to apply. It may 

 
 
100 
consist of selecting a sample of subjects to represent a given population 
and pairing of subjects to secure homogeneity.  
(vi) Administration of test / Carrying out the study:  
It  is  necessary  to  insist  on  close  adherence  to  plans  and experimental 
design. This   will   involve   controlling variable   or non-experimental 
factors, applying  the  experimental  factors  and  keeping  the  careful 
record of steps in the procedure. 
(vii) Measuring the outcomes / Collection of Data:  
Careful consideration must be given to the selection of the criterion on 
the basis of which the results are measured. 
(viii) Analyzing and interpreting the outcomes;  
The result pertaining to the factors under study should be clearly noted. 
The analysis of data demands expert use of statistical procedures. Only 
then the analysis becomes the basis for valid interpretation. 
(ix) Drawing the conclusions:  
The conclusions  of  the  study must  be  restricted  to  the  population 
actually covered; care must be taken not to over ganaralize the results. 
The  result  also  pertains  to  the conditions  under which  they  were 
derived. Care must be taken to restrict the conclusions to the conditions 
actually present  in the experiment. 
(x) Reporting the results:  
The study must be reported in sufficient details. 

 
 
101 
 
 
 Research Proposal 
 
Each researcher has to write a research proposal before he  undertakes 
any  research  work. For  a  new  researcher  it  presents a  great  problem 
because  he  does  not  know  the  components of  any  research  proposal. 
Even an  experienced  research  worker  is  required  to  write  a  research 
proposal  if  he  proposes  to  obtain financial  assistance  for  a  research 
project  from  any  research  organization.  In  our  own  country  NCERT, 
UGC, AICTE, ICSSR etc. have developed their own research formats but a 
few   basic   components   are   common   to   all   well-prepared   research 
proposals. 
 
Title of the Proposal: 
The first part of any research proposal is its title. If the title is not clearly 
stated  it will  not help  the  researcher  in  his  work. A  good  title  should 
clearly identify  the  research  proposal and  must  clearly  state  about  the 
following: 
(i) What variables are included in the research proposal? 
(ii) What is the relationship between the different variables? 
(iii) Which is the population to which the results may be generalized? 
While  independent  and  dependent  variables are  stated  in  the  research 
proposal  title,  which  are  of  experimental  nature,  the  variates  and 
criterion variables   are written in non-experimental studies. 
One example of each is given below; 
 
 
 
14
0 

 
 
102 
Experimental Study: 
“The Effect of Lecture Method and Text Book Method on the Academic 
Achievement in Economics of Class IX Students” 
 
Non-Experimental Study: 
“The  Relationship between Socio-Economic   Status   and   Academic 
Achievement in a Foreign Language of Class X Students” 
 In the experimental study the title of the research proposal is so 
stated that it shows the effect of independent variable upon dependent 
variable.  This  type  of  title  indicates  which  variable  will  be  manipulated 
by  the  research  and  upon  which variable  its effect  will  be  observed. In 
non- experimental  study,  the title   should indicate   the  relationship 
between  the  variate  and  the  criterion  variable.  In  non –experimental 
study  the variables  are  not  manipulated,  only relationship  between 
variate and criterion variable is stated. In the above examples, “Lecture 
method”  and  “Text  Book  Method”  are  independent  variable  and 
academic  achievement  is  dependent  variable. In  the  second  example 
the ‘Socio-Economic Status’ is an example of criterion variable. 
 The  boundaries  should  be  identified  for  which  the  research 
findings may be generalized. They are generally expressed in the terms 
of ‘Target Population’. 
 In the above examples, students of class IX and students of class 
X    are    target population    in experimental    and    non-experimental 
population respectively. 
 Another requirement for a good,, research title is that  it should 
not   be   too   lengthy.   Attempts   should   not   be   made   to answer   all 
questions  relating  to  variables  and  the  population  in  a  title. Fifteen  to 
twenty words are the maximum can be included in a research title. 
Some good titles are given below; 

 
 
103 
1. “A   Comparison   Between   Two   Methods   of   Teaching   Algebra-
Expository   and Discovery-in   the   Tenth Class   in   a   Recognized 
Secondary School”. 
2. “The Effects of Grading on Achievement in Mathematics.” 
3. “The  Relationship between Spelling,    Achievement    and    a 
Personality Factor”. 
4. “A Comparison  of the  Evaluation  of  Teacher  Performance  by 
Principals and Teachers”. 
5. “A Study of the Effect of Two Seating Arrangements in the in the 
Foreign Language Achievement of Class VI.” 
 
Research Problem: 
The  second  part  of  any  research  proposal  is  the  research  problem.  It  is 
of  special importance  on account  of  its  strategic  location. The  problem 
should define and delimit the specific area of the proposed research. It 
should begin with the general background of the problem and end with 
a specific statement of the problem. The research problem should be so 
structured  that  it  should  begin  with  a  broad  base  of  general  problems 
and explanations. It should be  followed by a survey of related research 
literature. It should end with the problem statement. The background of 
the  research  should  identify  the  variables  of  the  research  problem, 
discuss  the  variables  which  are  selected  for  the  research  study. Other 
important variables which are not included in the research study should 
also be briefly discussed. It should also be made clear that which criteria 
were  used  for  the  selection  of  the  variables. This  part  of  the  research 
proposal  should  be written  in simple  language  and  should  also  be 
précised. 
 The significance of the problem should also be written. It should 
meet the following requirements; 

 
 
104 
(i) The  research  proposal  is time  bound document.  Thrust  areas  of 
research  changes  from  time  to  time. Only  such  areas  should  be 
selected which are of crucial importance these days. 
(ii) The research proposal should be related with practical problems. 
It  should  provide  solution  to  any  existing  social /  behavioral 
/educational /institutional/library related problem etc. 
(iii) The  research  problem  should  not  have  small  target  population, 
because its result cannot be verified. 
(iv) Target population of any research problem should be related to a 
popular population. 
If  the  research  proposal  is  to  be  submitted  for  financial  assistance  it 
should  also  be  seen  that  what the  areas  of  priority  of  the  funding 
agency  are. Each  agency  grants  financial assistance  to those  research 
studies which it considers as central to its area of concern and others as 
peripheral. 
 The statement of the problem is the last stone in the pyramid of 
the  research  problem. It  specifies  the  variate  and  criterion  variables  in 
non-experimental  studies  and independent  and dependent  variables in 
an  experimental  study,  the  type  of  relationship between  variables  and 
target population. 
 Another criterion of a good problem statement is that it can be 
measured. A research   problem in   which   the   relationship   between 
variables  cannot  be  measured  empirically  cannot  be  categorized  a 
research problem. 
 The statement  which  seeks to  answer  the  question  of  value-
judgment  should not  be  included  in  research  problem.  Such  questions 
cannot  be  answered  by  a  research  study.  They  should  be  avoided in  a 
research proposal. 
 
 

 
 
105 
Statement of Hypothesis: 
The  third  part  of  a  research  proposal  is  statement  of  Hypotheses.  It  is 
done  more  sophistically  than  the  statement  of  problem.  The  research 
hypothesis  is  presented  in  an  affirmative  form  rather  than  in  the 
interrogative  form.  They  state  what  is  expected  to  occur  if  various 
conditions  are  evoked  or  presumed.  The  researcher  should  review  the 
related literature thoroughly before formulating hypotheses. 
 All  the  terms  which  are  used  in  any  hypothesis  should  be 
carefully  defined. The hypothesis should be  unambiguous and testable. 
Since  the  quantum  of  achievement  is  difficult  to  predict  at  the  time  of 
statement of hypothesis, researchers prefer ‘null hypothesis’ which 
assumes that only a chance difference is expected to occur between the 
groups  .A  null  hypothesis  merely  states  that  there  is  no  relationship 
between the variables. It is expressed in statistical terms; X
a
-X
b
=0. 
 Suppose  a  researcher  observed  that  Mr.X  appeared  to  have 
better  teacher-student  relation  that  Mr.Y. It  was  observed  that  Mr.X 
used  to  discuss  personal  problems  of  the  students  and  find  out  their 
solutions while Mr.Y used to have only formal relationship of classroom 
teaching. The researcher formulated the following problem. 
 “What are the effects of discussion of personal problems of the 
students on the teacher-student relationship”? 
 The   problem   statement   could   be   written   as   substantive 
hypothesis in the following words; 
 “The discussion of personal problems of the students will have 
better    teacher-student    relationship    than    not    having    any    such 
discussion.” 
 This   hypothesis   can   be   written   as   null   hypothesis   in   the 
following form; 
 “Discussion  of  personal  problems  of  the  students  by  the 
teachers  with  them  and  no  discussion  will  have  no  differential  effect 
upon the teacher-student relationship.” 

 
 
106 
The following criteria should be used for the formulation of testable and 
significant hypothesis; 
(i) The hypothesis must be clearly stated in operational terms. 
(ii) The hypothesis must be specific and testable. 
(iii) Research problems should be selected which are directly related to 
previous research or theoretical formulations. 
 
Procedures: 
The  fourth  part  of  a  research  proposal  is  called procedures.  It is  also 
called as ‘Methodology’ and ‘Method of Procedure.’ 
It comprises of the following; 
(i) Target Population:  
It  is  also  called  universe. The  salient  characteristics  of  the  population 
should be thoroughly described so that it should be definite that what is 
the target population for which sample is to be drawn and to which the 
results of the study could be generalized. 
(ii) Sampling Plan:  
The method of sampling should be specified in the research proposal. If 
the  sample  is  not  thoroughly  analyzed  and  precisely  described,  faulty 
generalizations  may  be  made.  The  sample  should  be  made  the  true 
representative  of  the  population. The  sampling  plan  should  also  be 
described in the proposal. It should describe how the units in the target 
population will be selected and used .A good sampling plan should meet 
the following criteria; 
a. Obtaining  or  constructing  an  accurate,  current  list  of  the  target 
population units. 
b. Method of drawing the sample. 
c. Number of subjects or population units to be selected. 
 

 
 
107 
(iii) Research Design:  
The  research  design  should  indicate  how  the  research  setting  will  be 
arranged in  order  to  yield  the  desired  data  with  the  least  possible 
contamination/ error by intervening variables. There is no single design 
that   can   be   applied   in   all   the   cases. It   depends   upon   individual 
researcher to devise his design. The design should ensure the answer of 
every hypothesis designed in the proposed research work. 
 A  well  prepared  research  design  should contain  the following 
characteristics; 
a) Specifications of its relationship to each research hypothesis. 
b) Description  of  the  methods  of  proposed  control  of  confounding 
variables and threats to validity. 
c) Description of the design in statistical terms. 
d) Identification of the types of interferences that may be made. 
(iv) Stimulus Materials: 
It  should  also  be  specified  in  the  research  proposal  that  what  stimulus 
materials will be used in the study. Kinds and ways of stimuli should be 
described.   Most   commonly   used   stimuli   are   printed   instructional 
materials. Instructional materials should include the following elements; 
a) Title 
b) Author/Editor 
c) Publisher 
d) Year of publication 
e) Intended population 
f) Time required for administration  
g) Cost of material 
(v) Response Measures:  

 
 
108 
The researcher should specify clearly what raw data are required by the 
research design and how they will be collected. Each instrument should 
be described including the following items of information: 
a) Title 
b) Author/Editor 
c) Publisher 
d) Population 
e) Forms 
f) Test Objectives 
g) Description of test ,items, scoring  procedures 
h) Traits represented in score 
i) Predictive / Concurrent validity 
j) Reliability data 
k) Normative data 
l) Internal consistency of tests 
m) Time required for administration 
n) Cost of material 
o) Data of publication 
(vi)  Data Collection Methods:  
The research proposal should identify  the schedules and procedures  to 
be used  for acquiring  the  data  and  recording  it  accurately. If  they  are 
lengthy, they should be placed in an appendix and reference be given in 
the body of the proposal. 
(vii) Data Analysis:  
The researcher should specify how the data will be ordered and reduced 
to  relate  directly  to  the  research  problem. The statistical  procedure  to 
be used in the analysis of data they should be described. It will be done 
hypothesis wise or not, it should be  indicated in the  research proposal. 

 
 
109 
If a complex design or obscure statistical test is to be used, it should be 
indicated in the proposal. 
 If the research proposal is to be submitted to a Funding agency, 
the  following  information  should  also  be  provided  in  the  research 
proposal; 
Logistics:  
It consists of the following; 
(a) Time Schedule 
(b) Personnel 
(i) Facilities, equipment and supplies 
(c) Travel expenses 
(d) Publication costs and other direct costs 
(e) Budget forms 
The researcher should identify  the  funding agency such as; UGC, ICSSR, 
NCERT, SCERT, Universities 
 The researcher should also obtain the research format from the 
funding   agency   and   prepare   research   proposal   on   the   guidelines 
provided by the funding agency. 

 
 
110 
 
 
Research Report 
 
A detailed  account of  the  research  experience from  selection and 
definition   of   the problem, formulation   of hypotheses, gathering, 
analyzing    and    interpreting    data,    testing    of    hypotheses,    making 
conclusion and suggesting further research in the related problem area 
is called a research report. 
 
Components:  
The basic components of a research report are as follows; 
(i) Introduction of the research problem: 
The researcher will write in it; 
a) What is the problem? 
b) What is its importance? 
c) What  is  the  relation  of  the  problem  with  previous  theory  and 
research, 
d) What are the objectives of the study? 
e) What are the hypotheses? 
(ii) Description of the procedure of the research:  
The researcher will write in it; 
a) How did he select the subjects? 
b) How many subjects were used? 
c) How were the subjects assigned to groups? 
d) What was done to the subjects? 
e) How was it done? 
15
0 

 
 
111 
f) When was it done? 
g) How long was it done? 
h) How was the reliability of the measuring instruments measured? 
i) How was the validity of the measuring instruments measured? 
(III) Description and presentation of the results:  
The researcher will write in it; 
a) Which statistical procedures he used to test the hypotheses? 
b) What were the outcomes of those procedures? 
c) What were the subsidiary findings of the research? 
(IV) Discussion of the study findings:  
The researcher will write in it; 
a) Why did the results manifest themselves in a particular way? 
b) What did there results signify? 
c) What   was   the   relationship   between   this   research   and   the 
previous research upon which it was based? 
 
Features:  
The following are the essential features of a good research report; 
(i) Clarity 
(ii) Conciseness 
(iii) Veracity 
(iv) No   place   for   figures   of   speech,   lyrical   prose   and   in   using 
anecdotes. 
(v) No lengthy digressions 
(vi) Only necessary details 
(vii) Absolute uncompromising honesty 
(viii) Serious attempt and not a game 

 
 
112 
 
 
Reasons for Writing:  
The following are the main reasons on account of which the researcher 
should write the research report. 
(i) It is a logical conclusion of doing the research. 
(ii) It enriches the curriculum vitae of the researcher which helps him 
in appointment and promotion. 
(iii) Writing  of  the  research  report  is  an  easy  task  and  it  is  not  that 
difficult as understood. 
Mode of Communications:  
The  researcher  may  use  any  of  the  following  mode  for  communicating 
his research results; 
(i) A research monograph: 
The  researcher  may  publish  a  research  monograph  on  the  basis  of  his 
research  results  through  a  research  journals  or  a  reputed  research 
publisher.ph  depends  upon  the  standard  of  the  research  work  and  the 
reputation of the researcher. 
(ii) A research journal:  
The  researcher  may  publish  a  research  paper  in  a  reputed  research 
journal.  But  this  requires  that  the  paper  should  be  acceptable  to  the 
Editor  of  the  journal.  The  prestigious  journals  send  these  papers  to 
reviewers  who  are  conversant  with  the  research  area  in  which  te 
research paper has been written. 
(iii) Presenting  in  the  meeting  of  the  Association/  Society  /Congress: 
There   are   annual   conferences   of   the   associations,   societies   and 
Congress   in   each   subject   area.   They   provide   opportunities   to   the 
researchers  to  present  their  research  results  in  the  form  of  a  research 
paper  before  the  members  of  the  association  or  the  society  or  the 
delegates of  the  Congress  which  are  followed  by  the  discussions.  The 

 
 
113 
journals  of  those  organizations  publish  these papers  in  the  form  of the 
proceedings of the Association / Society / Congress. 
 
Format:  
The research reports are divided into the following parts; 
(a) Preliminary Section:  
It consists of the following: 
(i) Title Page 
(ii) Preface 
(iii) Table of Contents 
(iv) List of Tables 
(v) List of figure, maps and illustrations 
(b)Introduction:  
It consists of the following: 
(h) Importance of the problem under investigation. 
(ii) A review of related literature 
(iii) Statement of Hypotheses or relationships being studied 
(iv) Delimitations of the study 
(v) Assumptions of the study 
(vi) Definition of important terms 
(c) Methods:  
It consists of the following; 
(i) How was the study conducted? 
(ii) From which population was the sample selected? 
(iii) How many subjects were selected? 
(iv) What were the demographic characteristics of the 
subjects?(male/female, average age) 

 
 
114 
(v) Was there any characteristic which make the sample a typical to 
the population? 
(vi) How were the subjects assigned to groups? 
(vii) What instructions were given to the subjects? 
(viii) How conditions were controlled? 
(ix) What was the treatment of variables? 
(x) How, when and on what were subjects measured? 
(xi) What data collection instruments were used? 
(xii) What was the format of items? 
(xiii) What was the reliability of the instrument? 
(xiv) What was the validity of the instrument? 
(xv) What  are  the  details  of  the  instruments  which  was  prepared  by 
the researcher? 
(d) Results:  
It consists of the following 
(j) What statistical procedure was used to study the hypotheses? 
(iii) What was the probability level of each hypotheses test? 
(iv) What was the probability level of each statistics? 
(v) What was the attendant degree of freedom? 
(vi) What was the strength of the relationship of the variables? 
(vii) What were the group means and standard deviation? 
(viii) What were principle finding? 
(e) Discussion:  
It consists of the following; 
(i) What were the original purposes of the study? 
(ii) How were these purpose met? 
(iii) Why the obtained occurred? 

 
 
115 
(iv) What were  the  conclusions  of  the researcher  for  practice,  theory 
and future research? 
(v) What is the contribution of the study to the research literature? 
(vi) What are the strengths and weaknesses of the study? 
(f) Reference Section: 
It consists of the following: 
(i) Bibliography 
(ii) Appendices: Questionnaires,  Copies  of  letters  used,  evaluation 
sheets, checklists etc. 

 
 
116 
-Bibliography- 
 
 
1. Ackoff, Russell  L. (1961). The  Design  of  Social  Research,  University 
of Chicago Press: Chicago. 
2. Allen,  T.  Harrell,  (1978). New  Methods  in  Social  Research, Praeger 
Publication: New York. 
3. Baker,  R.P.  &  Howell,  A.C. (1958). The  Preparation  of  Reports, 
Ronald Press: New York. 
4. Barzun,   Jacques   &   Graff. F. (1990).The   Modern   Researcher, 
Harcourt, Brace Publication: New York. 
5. Berelson Conard & Colton, Raymond.  (1978). Research and Report 
Writing for Business and Economics, Random House: New York. 
6. Best, John, W.& Kahn, James. (1986).Research in Education, 5
th
 ed., 
Prentice–Hall of India Pvt Ltd: New Delhi. 
7. Bhattacharya,     Srinivas. (1972).Psychometrics     &     Behavioural 
Research, Sterling Publishers Pvt.Ltd.: New Delhi. 
8. Burgess, Earnest. (1960).Research Methods in Sociology, New York 
Philosophical Library: New York. 
9. Chaturvedi,    J.C. (1970). Mathematical    Statistics, Nok    Jonk 
Karyalaya: Agra. 
10. Clover,  Vernon  T. &  Balsley,  Howard  L. (1984). Business  Research 
Methods, Grid, Inc: Columbus. 
11. Cochran,  W.G. (1963). Sampling  Techniques, John Wiley  &  Sons: 
New York. 
12. Deming,   W. Edwards.   (1980). Sampling   Designs   in   Business 
Research, John Wiley & Sons: New York. 
13. Dennis, Child. (1980). The Essentials of Factor Analysis, Rinehart & 
Winston: New York. 

 
 
117 
14. Denzin, Norman. (1986). The Research Act, Aldine :Chicago. 
15. Ferber, R. & Verdoorn, P.J. (1972). Research Methods in Economics 
and Business, The Macmillan Company: New York. 
16. Ghosh, B.N. (1992). Scientific Methods and Social Research, Sterling 
Publishers Pvt. Ltd : New Delhi. 
17. Glock, Charles Y. (1977). Survey Research in Social Sciences, Russell 
Sage Foundation: New York. 
18. Goode, William, J.   &   Hatt,  Paul   K. (1968). Methods   in   Social 
Research, McGraw-Hill: New York. 
19. Gopal, M.H. (1974). Research Reporting in Social Sciences, Karnatak 
University: Dharwar. 
20. Guilford,  J.P. (1964). Psychometric  Methods, McGraw  Hills, Inc: 
New York. 
21. Hilway,  T. (1964). Introduction  to  Research, 2
nd
 ed., Houghton 
Mifflin: Boston. 
22. Hyman Herbert  H.et  al., (1975). Interviewing  in  Social  Research, 
University of Chicago Press: Chicago. 
23. John   Peter,   W   M.   (1971). Statistical   Design   and   Analysis   of 
Experiments, The Macmillan Co.: New York. 
24. Johnson   Ellen. (1961). The   Research   Report: A   Guide   for   the 
Beginner, Ronald Press: New York. 
25. Kerlinger, Fred  N. (1973). Foundations  of  Behavioral  Research, 2
nd
 
ed., Holt, Reinhart and Wilson: New York. 
26. Kish, Leslie. (1965). Survey Sampling, John Wiley & Sons: New York. 
27. Kothari, C.R. (1984). Quantitative   Techniques,   2
nd
 ed.,   Holt, 
Reinhart and Wilson: New York. 
28. Leonard  Schatzman  &Anselm  L. Strauss. (1973). Field  Research, 
Prentice–Hall Inc.: New Jersey. 

 
 
118 
29. Levin, Richard  I. (1979). Statistics  for  Management, Prentice–Hall 
of India Pvt. Ltd: New Delhi. 
30. Miller,  Delbert  C. (1977). Handbook  of  Research  Design  &  Social 
Measurement, 3
rd
 ed., David Mckay Company, Inc: New Delhi. 
31. Phillips,  Bernard S. (1971). Social Research,  Strategy and  Tactics, 
2
nd
ed., The Macmillan Company :New York. 
32. Sadhu,  A.N. &  Amarjit. (1990). Research  Methodology  in  Social 
Sciences, Himalayan Publishing House :Bombay. 
33. Sharma, B .A, V. et  al (1998). Research Methods in Social Sciences, 
Sterling Publishers Pvt. Ltd.: New Delhi. 
34. Siegel, S. (1970). Nonparametric   Statistics   for   the   Behavioural 
Sciences, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co: New York. 
35. Tondon, B.C.  (1989). Research  Methodology  in  Social  Sciences, 
Chaitanya Publishing House: Allahabad. 
36. Yamane, T. (1973). Statistics: An Introductory Analysis, Harper and 
Row: New York. 
37. Young Pauline V. (1960). Scientific Social Surveys and Research, 3rd 
ed., Prentice–Hall: New York.