UNIVERSITY OF CAPE COAST     
SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
 
STUDENT GUIDE 
ELECTRONIC THESIS SUBMISSION 
v.1 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
 
This manual is to guide Postgraduate student, to submit the Thesis/Dissertation. Student will be 
required to upload the following document: 
 Student Main Thesis/Dissertation (MS Word Format) (Without the declaration and 
Dedication page) 
 Signed Turnitin Report (PDF Format) 
 Student Statement of Result (PDF Format) 
 Financial Clearance Report (PDF Format) 
 Submission Form 1 (filled and Signed) 
 Submission Form 2 (filled and Signed) 
 Supervisor’s Signature Form (Declaration Page) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: As part of the first Submission, There will be two submissions. Start each of the Titles 
with the word Internal and External proceeding the thesis of your thesis. The first submission 
should start with Internal – ‘your thesis title ’ and the Second Submission should have External 
– ‘your thesis title here’.Eg. If your title is : Exploratory study on the root cause of breast cancer  
The title of your first submission will be: Internal – Exploratory study on the root cause of 
breast cancer 
The title of your second submission will be: External – Exploratory study on the root cause of 
breast cancer  

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
A 
B 
C 
 
1. Enter the website address of the Electronic Thesis system into your browser (A): 
                https://ets.ucc.edu.gh  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Click on Register (B) under my account if you do not have an account on this system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
D 
F 
3. Enter your Student Email Address and click Register (C) 
4. You will see a confirmation message that a verification mail has been sent to you (D) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the inbox of the email you registered with, You will receive an ETS Account registration 
with tittle ets.support  (F) 
5. Open the email with ets.support to access the registration link  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
G 
6. You will see a similar link, Click on the Link in your verification mail (G) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Fill in your details and click on Complete Registration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NB: You are automatically logged in as soon as you click on  complete registration 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
 
H 
Please contact SGS to ensure you have been enrolled to your programme before proceeding 
Once you have been enrolled, Log in to the ETS system using your institutional email address and the 
password you provided during your registration. 
8. Navigate to your programme:  
a. Click on your College  
b. Click on your Faculty/School 
c. Click on your Department 
d. Click on your Programme  
NB:  If you have been enrolled by School of Graduate Studies, you will see H. 
9. Click on the Link to Start the Submission Process 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
 
 
10. Fill in your Student details 
Note:  
 
 
Refer to page 1 for the 
Format of the title. 
 
Other titles: leave blank 
 
 
Date of Complete: Enter the date  
You are submitting 
 
Publisher: University of Cape Coast 
 
Select Thesis by clicking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Select English as Language  
And Click on Next to continue  
To the next page 
 
 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
Use Save & Exit if you want to save and continue at some other time 
 
11. Fill in Details about your Thesis/Dissertation 
 
 
Enter a keyword and click on Add 
(This should be done one keyword at a time) 
Select the box beside the Keyword 
And click on Remove Selected if  
You made a mistake 
 
Abstract: you can copy and paste 
The Abstract from your thesis  
Document. 
 
Leave the Examiner Remark Blank 
 
Leave the College/ Department blank 
 
 
Click Next to continue.. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
12. Upload all your files stated on Page 1 of this guide 
 
 
Click on Browse to Select 
The file you want to upload 
 
File Description: Enter the 
File name as stated in page 1 
 
Click on Upload file & Add Another 
(Use this if you want Upload 
The selected file and Another file) 
 
Once the last file is selected, click on Next to continue  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
13.  Review Submission: Please check that all the information you have provided is accurate before you 
proceeding and click Next to continue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
          
14. Click in the Box beside the I Grant licence(G) and click on Complete the submission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 G 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

©2024 SGS-DICTS 
 
 
 
 
 
You have successfully submitted your Thesis/Dissertation to School of Graduate Studies 
 
Thank You 
 
 
For Support 
Call SGS IT on 0244261386 or 
Email: sgs.support@ucc.edu.gh 
 
Office Location  
SGS Building, 3
rd
 Floor 
Room 319