1 
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA  
LEGON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HANDBOOK FOR MASTERS DEGREE 
PROGRAMMES 
 
AND 
REGULATIONS GOVERNING GRADUATE STUDY 
AND UNIVERSITY EXAMINATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School of Graduate Studies 
 
Published in 2014 

3 
 
 
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA 
LEGON 
 
 
(Motto: Integri Procedamus) 
 
Established: AD 1948 
 
 
 
THE ARMS OF THE UNIVERSITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blue shield with three “AYA” standing 
upright in top half and “DWENINMENTOASO” 
in the middle of bottom half – all embossed 
in gold. (Designed by A.M. Opoku) 

5 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE UNIVERSITY 
 
THE UNIVERSITY OF GHANA
 was founded in 1948 as the University College of the Gold Coast 
on the recommendation of the Asquith Commission on Higher Education in the then British colonies. 
The Asquith Commission, which  was  set up in 1943 to investigate  Higher Education, recommended 
among  other  things,  the  setting  up  of  University  Colleges  in  association  with  the  University  of 
London. This was followed up by a number of separate Commissions in different regions. The West 
Africa   Commission   was   under   the   Chairmanship   of   the   Rt.   Hon.   Walter   Elliot.   The   Elliot 
Commission  published  a  majority  report  which  recommended the  establishment  of  two  University 
Colleges  in  the  Gold  Coast  (Ghana)  and  Nigeria,  and  a  minority  report  which  held  that  only  one 
University College for the whole of British West Africa was feasible. The British Government at first 
accepted the minority report of the  Elliot Commission and  decided  that a  University College  for the 
whole of British West Africa should be established at Ibadan in Nigeria.  But the people of the  Gold 
Coast  could  not  accept  this  recommendation.  Led  by  the  scholar  and  politician, the  late  Dr.  J.B. 
Danquah,  they  urged  the  Gold  Coast  Government  to  inform  the  British  Government  that  the  Gold 
Coast could support a University College. The British Government accordingly reviewed its decision 
and agreed to the establishment of the University College of the Gold Coast. 
 
The  University  College  of  the  Gold  Coast  was  founded  by  Ordinance  on  August  11,  1948 
for  the 
purpose  of  providing  for  and  promoting  university  education,  learning  and  research
.  Its  first 
Principal  was  the  late  Mr.  David  MowbrayBalme.  Mr.  Balme  was  farsighted,  courageous  and 
dedicated to the promotion of scholarship. By his vision, industry and single-mindedness of purpose, 
he built a college and laid the foundations for a sound University which is now a source of pride. In 
his ten years of principalship, he created an institution whose key-note was orderly living with dignity 
in  a  community  of  scholars.  One  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Asquith  Commission  was  that  the 
British  Government  should  set  up  an  Inter-Universities  Council  to  advise  on  all  matters  relating  to 
Higher  Education  in  the  new  British  Colonies.  The  Inter-Universities  Council  served  the  new 
University  College  of  the  Gold  Coast  in  an  advisory  capacity,  but  it  approved  all  academic 
appointments.  This  arrangement  helped  the  College  to  maintain  the  high  academic  standards 
associated  with  the  Universities  in  Britain.  Also,  it  enabled  the  College  to  seek  the  support  of  the 
Council in obtaining funds from the United Kingdom Government sources. 
 
From its inception, the University College of the Gold Coast was admitted to the Scheme of Special 
Relationship  extended  by  the  University  of  London  to  certain  English  and  overseas  University 
Colleges.  Under  this  scheme,  the  University  College  was  allowed  to  teach  for  the  external degree 
examinations  of London University.  It also  allowed  the  College  to  modify  the  London syllabuses  to 
suit  local  conditions  and  to  take  part  in  the  setting  and  marking  of  examinations.  But  London 
University gave final approval for courses and examinations since the degrees given were those of the 
University of London. For thirteen years, therefore, the University College looked up to two separate 
institutions in Great Britain: to the Inter-Universities Council for guidance on its broad policy, and to 
the  University  of  London  for  approval  and  control  of  details  of  degree  regulations.  The  University 
College benefitted greatly from this arrangement which certainly helped to maintain its high academic 
standards. 
 
In the  1960-61 academic  year, the  College  Council made a  request to the  Government of Ghana for 
legislation  to  constitute  the  University  College  into  a  University  with  the  power  to  award  its  own 
degrees.  The  Government  appointed  an  International  Commission  to  examine  the  problem.  On  the 
recommendations of that Commission, the University of Ghana was set up by an Act of Parliament on 
October  1,  1961  (Act  79).  The  then  President  of  the  Republic  of  Ghana,  Dr.  Kwame  Nkrumah, 
became the first Chancellor of the University, with Nana Kobina Nketsia IV, Omanhene of Essikado, 
as the (Interim) Vice Chancellor.   
 
 
 

7 
 
PRECINCTS 
 
The campus of the University lies about 13 kilometres north-east of Accra, the capital of Ghana, at an altitude 
of between 90 and 100 metres. From the Main University Gate on the Dodowa Road, the University Avenue 
extends to Commonwealth Hall on Legon Hill.  
 
Along  it are  grouped  other  Halls  of  Residence,  Departments,  lecture  theatres  and  laboratories.  Mid-way,  an 
open  space - the  University  Square - with  an  ornamental  pool  is  over-looked  by  the  Balme  Library  (named 
after David Mowbray Balme, the first Principal of the University College). Across from the University Square 
are sports fields, a Central Cafeteria and halls of residence. Behind Commonwealth Hall is an open-air theatre 
with  a  Grecian  style  auditorium  built  into  the  slope  of  Legon  Hill.  On  the  summit  of  Legon  Hill  is  the 
Convocation Group of Buildings which houses the University’s administration offices, the Great Hall, with a 
seating capacity of 1,500 and a Tower donated by the Government of Ghana in 1959 to commemorate Ghana’s 
Independence.  On  the  southern side  of  the  campus  are  residential  accommodation  for  staff,  the  University 
Basic  Schools,  the  Noguchi  Memorial  Institute  for  Medical  Research,  School  of  Public  Health,  the  Sports 
Stadium,  a  night  market,  supermarket  and  student  hostels;    while  on  the  Northern  side  are  more  teaching 
departments, lecture theatres and laboratories. Across the Accra-Dodowa road from the Main University Gate 
is a Police Station, a University Hospital and housing for Junior Staff of the University. 
 
The  College  of  Health  Sciences has  its  administration  as  well  as  the  Medical/Dental  /Allied  Health  Sciences 
and Pharmacy Schools located at the Korle-Bu Teaching Hospital, which is about three kilometres west of the 
centre  of  Accra,  and  about  18  kilometres  from  the  main  University  campus.  The  Accra  City  Campus  of  the 
University, located close to the business district of the nation’s capital, was established to provide part-time 
education  for  mature  persons  and  for  persons  who  prefer  not  to  study  full  time. There  is  also  the Graduate 
School of Nuclear and Allied Sciences, a constituent of the College of Basic and Applied Sciences located at 
the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission, Kwabenya, Accra. 
 
 
THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
 
The unit responsible for coordinating graduate studies is the School of Graduate Studies. The School is headed 
by  a  Dean, assisted  by  a  Vice-Dean  and  an  Executive  Secretary.    The  School is  responsible  for  graduate 
admissions,  registration  and orientation,  student records, approval  of  thesis/dissertation  supervisors and 
examiners,   thesis/dissertation   topics,   examination   of   theses/dissertations, accommodation   for graduate 
students, processing of applications for government bursaries/grants, approval of results and graduation.  The 
Board  of  Graduate  Studies  has  three Sub-Committees: Graduate  Programmes  Development  and Admissions 
Committee,  Graduate  Examinations  Committee  and  PhD  Technical  Committee. The  Graduate  Programmes 
Development and Admissions Committee has oversight responsibility for admissions, approving new graduate 
programmes,  accreditation  of  faculty  to  teach  graduate  level  courses  and  supervise  graduate  research.   The 
Graduate Examinations Committee has oversight responsibility for approving examiners, examining theses and 
dissertations,  determining  thesis  and  dissertation  results,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  performance  on 
graduate  programme  delivery.   The  PhD  Technical  Committee was  established  primarily  to  support  the 
implementation  of  the  University’s  four  year  PhD  programme  structure.  The Committee has oversight 
responsibility  for  issues  related  to  PhD  studies coordinated  by  the  School  of  Graduate  Studies.   The  School 
also  conducts  research  skills  enhancement  workshops  for  graduate  students  and  research  supervisors.   There 
are separate Handbooks for Masters’ and Doctoral studies.  
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
3. ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS 
FOR MASTERS DEGREES 
 
 
3.1  GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
3.1.1  The academic  calendar  is  organised  in semesters.  Programmes  are  made  up of  courses 
which are coded by levels of academic progression and are assigned credits. Each course 
is examined at the end of the semester. 
 
3.1.2  Each academic unit shall provide detailed information about the structure of programmes 
leading to the award of graduate degrees in that unit and offer advice and counselling to 
students. 
 
3.1.3  It  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  each  student  of  the  University  to  know  both  the specific 
requirements  of  the  graduate  degree  for  which  he/she  is  registered  as  well as  the  rules, 
regulations and policies of the University and the relevant academic unit. 
 
3.1.4  It shall be the responsibility of each student to ensure that the courses selected satisfy the 
requirements for the award of the graduate degree sought. 
 
3.1.5  Every  student,  by  the  act  of  registering,  agrees  to  abide  by  all  rules,  regulations and 
policies of the University and of the relevant academic unit. 
 
3.1.6  Each student is required to acquaint himself/herself with the general information outlined 
in this handbook and any relevant information from the academic unit(s) in which he/she 
is  enrolled.  Students  may  consult  their  Head  of Department  or  the Dean  of  Graduate 
Studies for additional information. 
 
3.1.7  Exemption  from  any  of  these  General  Regulations  may  be  granted  only  by  the express 
permission  of  the  Academic  Board  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Board of  Graduate 
Studies and the appropriate School Management Committee. 
 
3.1.8  The  University  reserves  the  right  to  change  rules,  regulations  and  policies,  as  well as 
programme and course requirements outlined in this handbook without prior notice. 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
3.2  ADMISSIONS 
 
  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
i.  To be admitted to a programme leading to the award of a higher degree, a candidate must 
have obtained a good first degree, at least a second class lower division, in an appropriate 
field of study at the University of Ghana or any other recognized University. 
 
ii.  In the case of a holder of MA/MSc or equivalent degrees in the same field of study who 
is adjudged capable by the relevant academic unit of undertaking research, he/she may be 
admitted into the second year of the MPhil programme. He/She must obtain a grade point 
average  (GPA)  of  3.0  (letter  grade B+)  or  better. This  must  be  within  a  period  of  five 
years after graduation. 
 
iii.  The  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  shall  consider  all  the  recommendations made  for 
admission and decide which candidates may be admitted. 
 
3.3  APPLICATION 
 
3.3.1  The candidate must complete the required application forms. Information on application 
form   and   procedures is available   online   at   the   University   of   Ghana   website 
(www.ug.edu.gh). 
 
3.3.2  Application for admission to programmes shall be through an online facility.  Forms for 
three referees’ confidential reports,  transcripts  and  certified  copies  of  certificates  shall 
be  provided  along  with  the  main  application  forms.  However,  in  exceptional cases, the 
completed    application  forms,  referees’  reports,  transcripts  and  certified  copies  of 
certificates  shall  be  sent  directly  to  the  Dean,  School  of  Graduate  Studies  or  submitted 
by the applicant in a sealed, signed and stamped envelope. 
 
3.4  SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION 
 
3.4.1  Completed application forms shall be submitted to: 
The Dean, School of Graduate Studies, University of Ghana, Legon, P.O. Box LG 571, 
Legon, Ghana.  E-Mail - dgs@ug.edu.gh 
 
Telephone - (233-030)   2500793   (Office   of   the   Dean)  or: (233-030)   2925798 
(Admissions Office) 
 
3.4.2  Applications  shall  be  considered  in  the  first  instance  by  the  academic  unit  in  which the 
applicant wishes to study. 

15 
 
3.4.3  The academic unit shall satisfy itself of the suitability of the candidate and the availability 
of  resources,  both  material  and  human,  for  the  successful  completion of the candidate’s 
work.  An  interview  and/or  a  qualifying  examination  may  be administered  by  the 
Department/Centre/Institute to determine the suitability of an applicant. 
 
3.4.4  The Head of the academic unit shall submit in writing to the Board of Graduate Studies a 
statement on the suitability or otherwise of each applicant. 
 
3.5  COURSE OF STUDY 
A  candidate  who  is  admitted  to  a  graduate  programme  shall  be  required  to follow the 
approved  course  of  study  over  the  prescribed  period. Students  must  be regular  and 
punctual for their academic work over the period of their candidature in the academic unit 
unless otherwise permitted by the Head in writing. 
 
3.6  ACADEMIC SESSION 
The regular academic session shall comprise two semesters, as follows:  
First Semester: August – December  
Second Semester:  January - May 
Sandwich  programmes  shall  be  organized  during  the  long  vacation (i.e.  May/June - 
July/August) 
 
3.7  STRUCTURE OF SEMESTER 
3.7.1  Regular Session 
A semester shall normally be of 17 weeks duration and shall be structured as follows: 
13 weeks of teaching 
1 week of revision 
3 weeks of examinations 
 
3.7.2  Sandwich Session 
Generally, a semester shall comprise: 
6 weeks of teaching 
1 week of revision 
1 week of examination 
 
3.8  GRADUATE STUDIES COMMITTEE 
3.8.1   A  Graduate  Studies  Committee  shall  be  set  up  in  each  academic  unit  offering graduate 
programmes with   the   core   responsibility   of   overseeing   all   aspects   of   graduate 
programmes delivery in the academic unit.  
 
 

16 
 
3.8.2   The functions of the Committee shall be to:  
 
i. advise the students in the selection of courses and formulation of thesis areas and 
titles, and dissertation titles. 
ii.  recommend thesis/dissertation supervisors.  
iii.     submit at the end of each semester progress report on each student to the Board of 
Graduate Studies through the Head of the academic unit. 
iv.    keep  under  review  and  make  proposals  for  the  overall  development  of graduate 
programmes in the Department. 
v.  ensure  the  timely  submission  of  dissertation/thesis  areas  and  titles through  the 
Head of the academic unit to the School Board. 
 
3.8.3 The  Graduate  Studies  Committee  shall  be  chaired  by  a full  time  faculty  of professorial 
rank from the academic unit. 
 
3.9  REGISTRATION AND ORIENTATION 
 
3.9.1  The  University  requires  all  fresh  students to  report  at  least  one  week  before  the 
commencement  of the  academic  year to  go  through  a  process  of  registration and 
orientation. 
 
3.9.2   Orientation is compulsory for all fresh students. Registration also takes place at the same 
period, concurrently with orientation.  
 
3.9.3  All students must register every semester for courses prescribed by their academic unit(s) 
within  the  specified  period  set  aside for  registration through  the  self-help  on-line 
registration  facility  and  submit  proof  of  registration  to  the  School  of  Graduate  Studies 
and the relevant department. 
 
3.9.4  Except with the express written approval of the Vice-Chancellor, no student is permitted 
to  register  for  more  than  one  programme  at  the  same  time  within  or  outside  the 
University.  The sanction for such  an offence shall be the cancellation of the University 
registration or loss of studentship. 
 
3.9.5  A  penalty  as  may  be  determined  by the  Academic  Board  from  time  to  time  shall be 
imposed  on  any  student  who  fails  to  register  during  the  normal  time  stipulated for 
registration by the University. 
 
3.9.6  A student who fails to register during the registration period specified shall forfeit his/her 
right to register for the semester. 

17 
 
3.9.7  No student shall be permitted to register by proxy. The registration of those involved 
(the  agent  and  potential  beneficiary)  shall  be  nullified.  This  means  that they  cannot 
pursue  studies  for  that  academic year.  The  University  reserves  the right  to  prosecute 
agents who are not students of the University of Ghana. 
 
3.10.  DURATION OF STUDY PROGRAMMES 
 
3.10.1  Duration of programmes 
The following shall normally be the duration for the completion of graduate degrees:- 
 
Programme    Duration 
MA/MSc and equivalents 
Full-Time     2 Semesters (12 months) 
Part-Time     4 Semesters (24 months) 
MPA/MBA and equivalents 
Full-Time     4 Semesters (24 months) 
Part-Time     6 Semesters (36 months) 
MPhil/MFA 
Full-Time     4 Semesters (24 months) 
 
3.10.2  Extension of Registration 
i.   Four (4)weeks to the expiry of the normal period for a postgraduate programme, a student 
who  has  still  not  been  able  to  complete  the  programme  may apply  for extension  of 
studentship and may be granted approval for periods not exceeding the following: 
 
 All Non-Thesis Masters Programmes    - One semester 
 MPHIL/MFA and other Thesis option Masters Programmes - Two semesters 
 Part-Time Programmes     - Two semesters 
 
ii.   There shall be no further extension of time beyond the above durations. 
 
iii. Applications  for  extension  must  be supported  by  duly  endorsed  progress  reports  and  a 
recommendation from the supervisor and Head of Department. 
 
3.11  Interruption of Study Programme 
 
3.11.1  A  student  registered  for  the  graduate  programme shall not  break  his/her  programme of 
study  for  more  than  two  continuous  semesters. This  means  that  a  student  may  interrupt 
his/her study programme for two continuous semesters only. 
 

18 
 
3.11.2  All interruptions must  be  by express  written permission  from  the Dean of  Graduate 
Studies. A student  shall  apply at  least  four  weeks in advance to  the Dean of  Graduate 
Studies  through  the  Head  of  Department,  stating reasons  why  he/she  wants  to  interrupt 
his/her  study  programme. The  student  shall  obtain  written  permission  from  the Dean  of 
Graduate  Studies before  he/she  leaves  the  University.  The Dean of  Graduate  Studies,  in 
giving approval,   may   consult   with   the   Dean   of   the   appropriate School and   the 
Counselling and Placement Centre, where necessary. 
 
3.11.3  Interruption  of  programme  is  permissible  on  health  grounds  if  it  is  supported  by a 
medical report. The report may require certification by the Director of Health Services of 
the University of Ghana. 
 
3.11.4 A  student  who  breaks  his/her  studies  without  permission for  more  than  two  continuous 
semesters shall be deemed to have lost his/her studentship. 
 
3.11.5 A  student  who  does  not  go  through  the  approved  procedures  before  interrupting  his/her 
studies  shall  be deemed  to  have  abandoned  his/her  studentship.    Subsequently,  such  a 
student   shall   be   withdrawn   from   his/her   registered   programme   and   be   notified 
accordingly by the Registrar. 
 
3.12  APPLICATION FOR RE-ADMISSION 
 
3.12.1  Loss of studentship resulting from interruption of study 
A student who  loses  his/her  studentship under 3.11 may  be  allowed  to  apply  for  re-
admission  to  the  University. The  grades  earned  on  previous  programme  may  be  waived 
and shall count towards the current studentship. 
 
3.12.2  Failure in thesis/dissertation/long essay/project work 
i.  Where a student’s thesis/dissertation/long  essay/project  work is declared  a  failure,  the 
candidate may be allowed to apply for re-admission to his/her programme within a period 
not exceeding two (2) semesters in the case of MA and equivalent programmes, and four 
(4)   semesters   in   the   case   of   MPhil   candidates   from   the   date   of   passing   written 
examination. 
ii.  Where a student satisfies the course work requirements of his/her programme but fails the 
research component, the student may be granted a waiver of course work. 
 
iii.  Such  an  application  shall  be  referred  to  the  relevant  Head  of  Department  for comments 
and  if  recommended  by  the  Department  for  re-admission,  the  candidate shall  be  re-
admitted  to  repeat  the thesis/dissertation/long  essay/project  work component  of  his/her 
programme for the following durations: 

19 
 
•  One semester (1) in the case of MA and equivalent programmes 
•  Two (2) semesters in the case of MPhil and equivalent programmes 
 
3.12.3  Such re-application must be made by completing the appropriate postgraduate application 
form during the normal admissions season only and shall be considered for admission at 
the next intake. 
 
3.12.4  There shall be only one opportunity for application for re-admission. 
 
3.13  LAPSED STUDENTSHIP 
 
3.13.1  Where  a  candidate  fails  to  complete  a  thesis/dissertation/long  essay/project  work within 
the required  period  including  extension,  the studentship  of  such  a  candidate  shall  be 
deemed to have lapsed and dissertation or thesis cannot be submitted. 
 
3.13.2  The candidate may wish to apply for re-admission in line with the procedure outlined in 
the case of a candidate who failed the research component of his/her programme. 
 
3.13.3  Only candidates who have satisfied all course work requirements shall be considered for 
re-admission. 
 
3.14  TRANSFER OF CREDITS 
 
3.14.1  Candidates  admitted  into MPhil degrees  may,  on  the  basis  of  official  transcripts, be 
allowed  to  transfer credits earned from a taught Master’s degree  course.  A  student may 
get a waiver for the coursework if the course work component of the Master’s degrees are 
comparable. 
 
3.14.2  A candidate who completes part of the coursework in another University may be offered 
admission on the basis of credits transferred to the University of Ghana, provided: 
 
i.    The  contents  of  such  programmes  are  deemed  comparable  and  satisfy the  course 
requirements  of  the  Department  and School  in  which he/she  seeks  to  pursue his/her 
studies. 
 
ii.   The  candidate  shall  take  any  additional  courses  as  may  be  required  by the  Department 
and School. 
 
iii.   Such transfers may be considered only after admission of student into programme. 
 

20 
 
3.15 COURSE CREDITS 
 
3.15.1  One  (1)  course credit  shall  be  defined  as  one  hour  lecture,  or  one  hour  tutorial, or  one 
practical session (of 3 hours), or three hours of fieldwork, per week for a semester in line 
with general University policy. 
 
3.15.2  No graduate taught course shall be more than four (4) credit hours. 
 
3.16  CODING AND NUMBERING OF COURSES 
 
3.16.1  All  graduate  degree  courses  shall  have  letter  and  number  codes  beginning  with four 
letters  signifying  a  Department  or  programme/subject,  followed  by  a  three-digit number 
in the ranges 600-699.  
 
3.16.2  The third digit in the number code shall be: 
 
•   zero (0), for a course that is offered in both semesters, 
•  odd (1, 3, 5, 7, or 9) for a course offered in the first semester, 
•  even (2, 4, 6, or 8) for a course offered in the second semester. 
 
3.17  MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM COURSE WORK LOAD PER SEMESTER 
 
3.17.1  Full-Time Study 
A full-time student shall carry a minimum course workload of 12 credits and a maximum 
of 18 credits per semester. In exceptional cases, candidates may be allowed to exceed up 
to  4  extra  credits  where  written  permission  has  been  granted by  the  Board  of  Graduate 
Studies. 
 
3.17.2  Part-Time Study 
A  part-time student  shall  carry  a minimum workload of  six credits  and  a  maximum of 
nine credits per semester. 
 
3.18  STRUCTURE OF PROGRAMMES AND COURSE UNIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
The following are the Master’s degree options available to academic units and the minimum  
and maximum credits required of a registered student to graduate are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
3.18.1  Twelve to Eighteen (12-18) months Master’s Degree Programmes 
 
i.   Master’s Degree (Dissertation Option) 
Course work 24-36 (12-18 credits per semester) 
Seminar 3 credits 
Dissertation 12 credits 
Total 39-51 credits 
 
ii.   Master’s Degree (Long Essay Option) 
Course work 30-36 (15-18 credits per semester) 
Seminar 3 credits 
Long Essay 6 credits 
Total 39-45 credits 
 
iii.   Master’s Degree (Non-dissertation/Non-long Essay Option) 
Course work 30-36 (15-18 credits per semester) 
Seminar 3 credits 
Special Topics 6 (3 credits per semester) 
Total 39-45 credits 
 
iv.   All categories of Master’s programmes offered including non-dissertation/non-long essay 
option shall offer a course in Research Methodology. 
v.   For  the  non-dissertation/non-long  essay  option, two Special  Topics  courses with  six  (6) 
credits  (i.e.  three  (3)  credits  per  semester)  shall  be  taken  in  place  of  the  dissertation  or 
long essay. This shall involve directed reading of topical issues in the subject area.  
vi.  Both Special Topics courses must be passed in order to qualify for the award of degree 
 
3.18.2  Two-year Master’s degree with Thesis or Course Work  
 
i.   Two-Year Master’s (Course Work) 
Year 1   24-36 (course work credits) 
Year 2   24-36 (course work credits) 
Long Essay  6 credits 
Seminar  6 credits 
Total   60-72 credits 
 
ii.   Two-Year Master’s (Thesis Option) 
Year 1: 
Course Work  24-36 credits 
Seminar I  3 credits 
Year 2: 
Seminar II  3 credits 
Thesis   30 credits 
Total   60-72 credits 
 

22 
 
iii.   Minimum and maximum credits  
The minimum  and  maximum  credits  for  2-year  Master’s  programme  with  Thesis  or 
course work shall be 60-72 credits. 
 
iv.  Seminar I (Thesis option) 
In Year 1, each student is expected to attend all seminars specified by the Department and 
make  a  departmental  presentation  on  his/her  research  proposal  in  the  second  semester. 
This presentation will be assessed for three (3) credits. 
 
v.  Seminar II (Thesis Option) 
In Year 2, each student will make a presentation on the progress of his/her thesis and be 
assessed for three (3) credits. 
 
vi.  In all cases, the total credits shall not exceed 72 credits. 
 
3.19  TEACHING AND SUPERVISION AT GRADUATE LEVEL 
 
3.19.1  Accreditation of Teaching Faculty 
Teaching  faculty  for  graduate  courses  shall normally  be  PhD  holders  or  faculty  of 
professorial  rank.  For  this  purpose,  a  head  of  department  shall  submit  the  names and 
highest  qualification  of  faculty  for  teaching  at graduate  level  and  submit  the  list  to  the 
Board of Graduate Studies for approval through the appropriate School Board. 
 
 3.19.2 Accreditation of Supervisors 
A  Supervisor  must  have  taught  or  carried  out  research  in  a  university  or  an  equivalent 
institution  and  must  have  a  record  of  research  work  and  publications.   All  supervisors 
shall be  accredited  by  the  Board of  Graduate  Studies.  For  this  purpose,  a  form  for 
accreditation  of  supervisors  shall be  completed  by  the prospective  supervisor, endorsed 
by  the  Head  of  Department and submitted through the  appropriate School Board  to  the 
Board of Graduate Studies for approval. 
 
3.19.3  Assignment of Supervisors 
i.  A Supervisor(s) shall    be    required    for    every graduate student    undertaking 
thesis/dissertation/long  essay/project  work in  all academic  units of  the  University.  A 
supervisor from  the  department,  a relevant academic  unit  or research  institute, another 
University or research institute may be appointed to be on the supervisory committee.   
 
ii.   The lead supervisor shall be from the University of Ghana and shall normally not serve as 
lead supervisor for more than five (5) students.   
 

23 
 
iii.   Lead supervisors shall be appointed by the departmental Graduate Studies Committee. 
iv.    A Faculty member pursuing a graduate degree programme in the University of Ghana or 
other institutions shall not supervise other graduate students’ theses or dissertations. 
 
3.19.4  Supervisory Committee 
i.  The number of Supervisors shall normally be as follows: 
MA Dissertation/Long Essay/Project Work  - One (1) to Two (2) Supervisor(s) 
MPhil Thesis - Two (2) Supervisors 
 
ii.   There  shall  be  a  Lead  supervisor  who  shall  be  the  coordinator  for  the  supervisory  team. 
The Lead Supervisor shall be of at least Senior Lecturer status and/or shall hold a degree 
that is higher than that for which the supervised student is enrolled.  
 
iii.  It shall be the duty of the Lead Supervisor to convene supervisory committee meetings at 
least twice in a semester. The  Lead Supervisor must submit a completed progress report 
form to the Dean of Graduate School through the Head of Department at the end of every 
semester. 
 
3.20  APPROVAL OF THESIS/ DISSERTATION AREAS AND SUPERVISORS, 
THESIS/DISSERTATION TITLES, SUPERVISORS AND EXAMINERS 
 
3.20.1  Master’s dissertation areas and names and addresses of supervisors shall be submitted to 
the  appropriate  School Management  Committee for  approval before  the  end  of  the  first 
semester. Final   approval   of   thesis   areas   and   supervisors   shall   be   by   the   School 
Management Committee or College Board. 
 
3.20.2 Master’s dissertation  titles,  names and  addresses of  supervisors  and full  contact  details 
(address,  email  and  telephone  number)  of examiners  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Board  of 
Graduate  Studies at  the beginning  of  the  second  semester through  the  relevant School 
Management Committee. 
 
3.20.3 In the case of MPhil candidates, the thesis areas, names and addresses of supervisors shall 
be  submitted  to  the  appropriate  Faculty/School  Board  for approval  by  the  end  of  the 
second semester of the first year.   Final approval of thesis areas and supervisors shall be 
by the School Management Committee or College Board. 
 
3.20.4  MPhil thesis titles, names, and full contact details (address, email and telephone number) 
of supervisors and examiners shall be submitted at the beginning of the second semester 
of the second year to the Board of Graduate Studies for approval through the appropriate 
School Management Committee. 

24 
 
3.21  GRADING SYSTEM FOR COURSE WORK 
 
3.21.1  A student’s performance in a course shall be graded as follows: 
Grade   Numerical Marks (%)  Interpretation   Grade Point 
A   80 - 100    Excellent    4.00 
B+   70 - 79    Very Good    3.50 
B   60 - 69    Good     3.00 
C   50 - 59    Pass     2.00 
D   30 - 49    Fail     1.50 
F   0 - 29     Fail     1.00 
Z       - Disqualification 
I      - Incomplete with justification 
Y       - Continuing 
X       - Incomplete without justification 
 
3.21.2  Grade  Point  (GP): Each  Grade  shall  be  assigned  equivalent  grade  point  as indicated 
above.  The  number  of  (grade)  points  earned  by  a  student  for  each  course completed  is 
computed  as  the  product  of  the  number  of  credits  for  the  course  and the  grade  point 
equivalent of the grade obtained in that course. 
 
3.21.3  Cumulative  Grade  Point  Average  (CGPA): The  student’s  cumulative  grade point 
average  shall  be  calculated  by  dividing  the  total  number  of  grade  points obtained,  up  to 
any specified time, by the total number of credits for all courses for which the student has 
registered up to that time. 
 
3.21.4  Final  Grade  Point  Average  (FGPA): The  FGPA  shall  be  the  CGPA  for  all  courses 
under consideration calculated up to the end of a student’s academic programme. 
 
3.22  DEFINITION OF GRADES 
 
3.22.1  Pass Grades: Grades A, B+, B and C constitute Pass grades. 
 
3.22.2  Failure Grades: Grades D, F, X, Z constitute Failure grades. 
 
3.22.3  Continuing: A  grade  Y  (for Continuing)  shall  be  awarded  at  the  end  of  a  semester to 
any student who is taking a course which continues into the next semester. 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
3.22.4  Non-Completion of Course 
i. A  grade  I  (for Incomplete)  shall  be  awarded  to  a  student  who  is  unable  to  complete a 
course  for  reasons  adjudged  by  the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  as  acceptable. Such  a 
student  shall be  expected  to  complete  the  course  the  very  next  time  the course  is 
available. 
ii.  A grade X shall be awarded to a student who is unable to complete a course for reasons 
adjudged by the Board of Graduate Studies as unacceptable. 
 
3.22.5  Disqualification 
 
i.  A  grade  Z  denotes disqualification from  an  examination  as  a  result  of  an examination 
malpractice  or  offence,  and  shall  be  awarded  whenever  it  is  established that  a  candidate 
had attempted to gain an unfair advantage in an examination. 
 
ii.  A candidate awarded a grade Z may be barred from taking a University Examination for 
a stated period, or indefinitely, or may be expelled from the University. 
 
iii.  A grade Z may be awarded only by the Board of Graduate Studies. 
 
3.23  ELIGIBILITY FOR EXAMINATIONS 
 
3.23.1  A  student  shall  attend  all  lectures,  tutorials,  seminars  and  practicals  and undertake  all 
other activities and assignments as approved by the University for his/her programme. 
 
3.23.2  Each  Department  shall,  with  the  approval  of  the  Academic  Board,  determine the 
requirements  for  the  courses  they  offer.  A  student  who  does  not  fulfil  the requirements 
for any course shall not be allowed to take the examination for that course. 
 
3.23.3  Any  student  who  is  absent  for a cummulative period  of  25% from  lectures, tutorials, 
practicals  and  other  assignments prescribed  for  any  course  in  any semester  shall  be 
deemed to have withdrawn from the course. Such a student shall not be permitted to write 
the semester examination. 
 
3.24  REGISTRATION FOR EXAMINATIONS 
 
3.24.1  Registration   for   a   University   Examination   shall   require   the   endorsement   of   the 
Registration List by the Head of Department to the effect that the candidate has pursued 
satisfactorily  the  approved  course(s)  of  study  in  each subject  being offered  over  the 
prescribed period. A candidate’s registration shall not be valid unless it is so endorsed. 
 

26 
 
3.24.2  Endorsement  as  in  (3.24.1)  shall  be  withheld  if  a  candidate  is  not deemed  to  have 
followed satisfactorily the approved course of study.  
 
3.24.3  In the event of the withholding of an endorsement, the Head of Department shall request 
the   appropriate School Management   Committee to   confirm   the   action   taken,   and 
subsequently communicate same to the Board of Graduate Studies for a final decision. 
 
3.24.4  Where   applicable,   candidates   shall   have   up   to   3   weeks   (21   days)   from   the 
commencement of the semester within which to ADD or DROP courses. 
 
3.24.5 After 21 days of the semester, departments shall publish for verification by students, lists 
of registered candidates for the courses offered by the department.  The lists of registered 
candidates shall be forwarded to the Academic  Affairs  Directorate before the end of the 
sixth week of the semester.  The lists shall be deemed as constituting final registration for 
dnd-of-semester  examination.    This  means  that  by  the  end  of  the  sixth  week,  students 
whose  names  do  not  appear  in  any  course  list  shall  not  be  allowed  into  the  end-of-
semester  examination  for  that  particular  course.    Similarly,  students  who  are  duly 
registered  for  a  course  but  who  fail  to  take  the  end-of-semester  examination  for  that 
course  shall  be  deemed  to  have  absented  themselves  from  the  examination  of  that 
particular course, for which grade X shall be awarded. 
 
3.25  STUDENT IN GOOD STANDING 
 
3.25.1  A  student  in  good  standing  shall  be  one  who  would  have  passed  a  minimum  of 24 
graduate  level  credits at  the  end  of  the  second  semester  or  Part  I  examinations and  has 
obtained a Final GPA of 2.50 or better. 
 
3.25.2  Where  a  student  does  not  pass  the  required  minimum  of  24  graduate  level  credits as 
stated above,  he/she  shall  be  deemed  not  to  be  in  good  standing  and  shall be  asked  to 
withdraw. 
 
3.25.3  Notwithstanding  the provision  in  3.25.1,  candidates  who  fail  to  make  the Final  Grade 
Point Average of 2.50 or better at the end of their graduate course work would be deemed 
to  have  failed  even  if  they  have  passed    the  required  minimum  of  24  graduate  level 
credits. Such candidate(s) shall be asked to withdraw. 
 
3.25.4  If a candidate obtains the minimum number of 24 credits required at the end of the Part I 
examinations, but fails in more than two core courses, the candidate shall be withdrawn. 
 
 

27 
 
3.26  RE-TAKING COURSE WORK 
 
3.26.1  MA and equivalent programmes 
For  all 12 – 18  months graduate  programmes,  a  candidate  may  be  permitted  to  re-take 
failed  courses  at  the  next  regular  opportunity. A  candidate  who  fails  a  second semester 
course  may  submit  his/her  dissertation  and apply  to  re-take  the  failed course  during  the 
second semester of the next academic year. 
 
3.26.2  MPHIL/MBA and equivalent programmes 
  If  a  candidate  obtains  the  minimum  number  of  24  credits and  a  Final  GPA  of  2.50 
required at the end of the Part I examinations, but fails in up to two core courses, he/she 
can proceed to the second year, but must pass all such core course(s) before obtaining the 
degree. 
 
3.26.3  Candidates re-taking failed papers must do so within the maximum time permitted for the 
completion of their programmes as prescribed (See 3.10) 
 
3.27  DEFERMENT OF EXAMINATION 
 
3.27.1  On grounds of ill-health:  
A  student,  who  has  satisfied  all  the  requirements  as specified  in  Section 3.23, but  is 
unable  to  take  the  end  of  semester  examinations on  grounds  of  ill  health,  shall,  on 
application  to  the  Dean  of  Graduate  Studies, and  on  provision  of  a  Medical  Certificate 
issued or endorsed by the Director of University of Ghana Health Services, be permitted 
to defer the examinations, and be allowed to take them at the next offering. 
 
3.27.2  On grounds other than ill-health:  
In the case  of  deferment  on  grounds  other  than  ill-health, the  student  shall  apply  to  the 
Dean of Graduate Studies through the Head of Department stating reasons why he or she 
wishes to defer the examination. Upon approval, the student must take the examination at 
the next offering. 
 
3.27.3  In all cases of deferment of examinations, the applicant(s) must obtain written responses 
from the Dean of Graduate Studies before leaving the University. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
3.28  SCHEME OF EXAMINATION 
 
3.28.1  MA AND EQUIVALENT PROGRAMMES 
 
i.  The    examination    shall    consist    of    written    papers    and    such    practical/project 
work/dissertation/long essay as may be prescribed, and where applicable. 
ii.  A candidate may also be examined orally on the substance of his/her dissertation. 
 
3.28.2  MBA/MPA/EMBA 
i.   The examination shall consist of written papers and such practical work/long essay/ term 
paper as may be prescribed.  
ii.   A candidate may also be examined orally on the substance of his/her dissertation. 
 
3.28.3  MPhil 
i.   The  examination  shall  consist  of  written  papers  and  such  practical  work/thesis/seminars 
as may be prescribed. 
ii.  In addition, a candidate shall be examined orally on the substance of his/ her thesis. 
 
3.29  FEES 
 
3.29.1  Fees for tuition, research, residence and examination shall be paid at rates prescribed by 
the Academic Board, and are subject to annual review. 
3.29.2  No candidate  shall  be  admitted  to  an  examination  unless  he  or  she  has  discharged all 
obligations  owed  to  the  University,  including  payment  of  the  appropriate tuition, 
research, residence and examination fees. 
 
3.30  CHANGE OF REGISTRATION 
 
3.30.1  Change from MA to MPhil 
i. On the basis of a candidate’s performance in a one-year Masters degree programme, the 
head   of   a   department,   in   consultation   with   the   Departmental   Graduate   Studies 
Committee, may recommend to the Board of Graduate Studies that the candidate proceed 
to register for an MPhil degree. Such a recommendation may be made in the course of 
the second semester of the degree for which the candidate was initially registered.  
 
ii. A  student  must  obtain  an  average  of  B+  (or  GPA  of  3.5)  from  the  first  semester 
examination in order to be eligible for upgrading.   
 
iii. The period spent on the initial registration shall be counted towards the period permitted 
for the new registration.  

29 
 
 
iv. In  submitting  a  recommendation  that  a  candidate  should  change  his/her  registration,  the 
candidate’s thesis topic and the name(s) of members  of a  new  Supervisory  Committee 
shall   be   communicated   to   the   School   of   Graduate   Studies   through   the School 
Management Committee. 
 
3.30.2  Supplication from M.Phil to MA  
Not  later  than  three  months  before  the  date  of  submission  of  the  thesis,  a  Head  of 
Department  may,  in  consultation  with  the  Supervisors  and  the  departmental  Graduate 
Studies Committee, recommend to the Board of Graduate Studies that a candidate who is 
registered  for  MPhil  Degree  should  be  permitted  to supplicate for  the  MA  Degree  on 
grounds of: 
 
i.     inadequate progress with the research, or 
ii.    failure to fulfil departmental requirements pertaining to the MPhil degree.  
 
3.30.3  Change from MA/MSc to PhD 
i. On the basis of a candidate’s performance in a one-year Masters degree programme, the 
head   of   a   department,   in   consultation   with   the   Departmental   Graduate   Studies 
Committee, may recommend to the Board of Graduate Studies that the candidate proceed 
to register for the Ph.D degree. Such a recommendation may be made by 31
st
 July of the 
current  academic  year  of  admission by  submitting  course  work  results  of the  two 
semesters of the degree for which the candidate was initially registered. 
 
ii. A student must obtain a cumulative GPA of 3.5 and above from the first and second 
semester course work examination in order to be eligible for upgrading.   
 
iii. In addition to point (ii) above, a  case  must be  made with regard  to  the potential of 
the student’s intended research to be expanded into a PhD research. 
 
iv. The period spent on the initial registration shall NOT count towards the period permitted 
for the new registration.  
 
v. In  submitting  a  recommendation  that  a  candidate  should  change  his/her  registration,  the 
candidate’s thesis topic and the name(s) of members  of a  new  Supervisory  Committee 
shall   be   communicated   to   the   School   of   Graduate   Studies   through   the   School 
Management Committee. 
 
 
 

30 
 
3.30.4  Change from MPhil to PhD 
i. On the basis of a candidate’s performance in a  two-year  MPhil  degree programme,  the 
head   of   a   department,   in   consultation   with   the   Departmental   Graduate   Studies 
Committee, may recommend to the Board of Graduate Studies that the candidate proceed 
to register for the Ph.D degree. Such a recommendation may be made by the end of the 
First Semester in the second (research) year by  submitting course work results of the 
two semesters of the degree for which the candidate was initially registered. 
 
ii. The provisions under Section 3.30.3 (ii-v) above shall apply. 
 
3.31  EXAMINERS AND DETERMINATION OF RESULTS 
 
3.31.1  Moderation of Written Papers 
All written examinations shall be moderated by faculty members within the department, 
school or college. 
 
3.31.2 Examination of Thesis/Dissertations/Project Works/Long Essays 
Two (2) examiners shall be appointed by the Academic Board on the recommendation of 
the     School Board     and     the     Board     of     Graduate     Studies     to     examine     a 
Thesis/Dissertation/Long Essay/Project Work submitted for the Master’s degree.  
 
3.31.3  Internal Examiners for Thesis/Dissertations/Project Works/Long Essays 
 
i.   Internal  examiners  shall  be assigned for  thesis,  dissertations, project  works and  long 
essays from  within  the  academic  unit or  from  outside  the  academic  unit  provided  the 
examiner  is  not  from  an institution  other  than  the  University  of  Ghana.  The  internal 
examiner must be the holder of a degree that is at least equivalent to the degree for which 
candidate has enrolled.   
 
ii.  The  Head  of  Department  shall  complete  and  submit  an  accreditation  form to the  School 
of Graduate Studies for approval in the case of new internal examiners. 
 
iii.  Faculty  members  pursuing   graduate  degrees  in  the  University   of  Ghana  or  other 
institutions cannot examine other graduate students. 
 
iv.  The   Lead   Supervisor   of   a student   shall   NOT   normally   examine   the student’s 
thesis/dissertation.    However,  only one of the supervisors of a Master’s student may be 
appointed as an Internal Examiner. 
 
 

31 
 
3.31.4  Appointment of External Examiners 
 
i.   All    external    examiners    shall    be    appointed    by    the    Academic    Board    on    the 
recommendation of departments through the appropriate School Management Committee 
and the Board of Graduate Studies. 
 
ii.   Departments  may  request  for  appointment  of  external  examiners  for  graduate thesis  or 
dissertation  through  the School Management  Committee as  prescribed  under  Section 
3.19.  In the case of new external examiners, both abridged and full curriculum vitae shall 
be  submitted  through  the School Management  Committee to  the  Board  of  Graduate 
Studies for approval.  The abridged curriculum vitae may also be submitted together with 
thesis/dissertation examination particulars for approval. 
 
3.31.5  Grading System for Dissertation/Thesis/Long Essay/Project Work 
 
i.  A student’s performance  in  a  dissertation/thesis/long  essay/project  work shall  be  graded 
as follows: 
Grade   Numerical Mark (%)    Interpretation 
A   80 - 100     Excellent 
B+   70 - 79     Very Good 
B   60 - 69     Good 
C   50 - 59     Referred 
F   0 – 49     Fail 
 
ii.  A  candidate  who  is scored grade “A” by all examiners including  the  oral  examination 
shall be awarded Distinction in the thesis or dissertation. 
 
iii.  A  separate  report,  duly  signed,  shall  be  submitted  by  each  Examiner  to  the  Board of 
Graduate Studies in respect of a dissertation or thesis submitted. 
 
iv.  The Examiners’ reports on a dissertation or thesis shall indicate as comprehensively as 
possible  whether  or  not  the  candidate  demonstrates  a  good  general  knowledge of  a 
particular field of learning within which the subject of his/her dissertation or thesis falls; 
whether or not the presentation of the candidate’s material is satisfactory; and whether or 
not  the  dissertation  or  thesis  meets  the  requirements of  the  degree  for  which  it  is 
submitted. 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
3.31.6 Oral Examination for Master’s Candidates 
 
i.   A  candidate  who  submits  a  thesis  for  MPhil  and  equivalent  degrees,  shall  undertake a 
departmental oral defence of his/her thesis before the thesis is submitted to the School of 
Graduate Studies for examination.  
 
ii.   For  this  examination,  a  panel  of three  including  a  Chairman,  who  shall  normally  be  the 
Head of Department and the internal examiner of the candidate, shall be constituted. The 
Chairman of this panel must be a person other than the candidate’s supervisor. Where the 
Head  of  Department  is  the  candidate’s  internal  examiner  or  the supervisor,  another 
faculty  member  shall  be  nominated  by  the  Head  of  Department to  serve  on  the  panel  in 
addition to the internal examiner. 
 
iii.   The  thesis  shall  be submitted  for  examination  together  with  the report  of  the  oral 
examination. 
 
iv.  If  a  candidate  for  the  MPhil/MFA  degree  fails  to  satisfy  the examiners  at  the  oral 
examination,  the  panel  may  recommend  to  the  Board  of Graduate  Studies  that  the 
candidate  be  permitted  to  submit  to  a  further  oral  examination  within  a  period  not 
exceeding two (2) months. 
 
v.  If  the  candidate  for  the  MPhil/MFA  degree  fails  to  satisfy  the Examiners  at  the  second 
oral examination, the thesis shall fail. 
 
3.31.7  Determination of Dissertation/Thesis Results 
 
The Board of Graduate  Studies shall review the  recommendations of the  examiners of a 
Master’s Thesis or Dissertation as follows: 
i.   Where  both  examiners  pass  the  dissertation/thesis  and the  candidate passes  the  oral 
examination, the Board shall pass it. 
ii.   Where one examiner fails or refers a dissertation/thesis, the Board shall review the nature 
of the fail or referral grade and decide whether to pass, refer or fail it. 
iii.    A Master’s dissertation or thesis referred by more than one examiner shall be referred. 
iv.    A Masters’ dissertation or thesis failed by more than one examiner shall fail. 
v.    A   candidate   who   fails   the   oral   examination   shall   be   referred   and   given another 
opportunity to undertake the oral examination. 
vi.  A Masters dissertation/thesis referred for a second time shall fail. 
vii.  A  plagiarized  dissertation/thesis  shall  be  rejected  and  the  candidate  shall  be deemed  to 
have failed. 
 

33 
 
3.32 REVIEW OF WRITTEN EXAMINATION 
 
3.32.1  A  candidate  who  is  not  satisfied  with  the  results  of  a  University  Examination affecting 
him/her  may  request  a  review  by  the  submission  of  an  application  to  the Dean  of 
Graduate  Studies  through  the  Head  of  Department  and  pay  a  review fee which  shall  be 
three times the normal Examination Fee. 
 
3.32.2  An  application  for  a  review  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Dean  of  Graduate  Studies through 
the  Head  of  Department  not  later  than  21  days  after  the  release  of  the  said results  and 
shall state the grounds for review. 
 
3.32.3  No action shall be taken on an application, which is submitted outside the time stipulated 
above. Review shall not proceed unless the Review Fee has been fully paid. 
 
3.32.4  An application entered on a candidate’s behalf by a  person  other  than  the  aggrieved 
candidate himself/herself shall not be entertained. 
 
3.32.5  In  the  light  of  the  review,  the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  may  authorise  the  Registrar to 
amend the results previously released as appropriate. 
 
3.32.6  If  it emerges  that  a  complaint  for  review  is  frivolous  or  ill-motivated,  the  Board of 
Graduate   Studies   may   prescribe   further   sanctions   which   may   include   barring the 
complainant from University examinations for a stated period or an indefinite period. 
 
3.33  SUBMISSION  OF LONG  ESSAY/PROJECT  WORK/  DISSERTATION/THESIS 
FOR EXAMINATION 
 
3.33.1  The  Head  of  academic  unit  shall  submit  the  dissertation  or  thesis  titles  of  all Master’s 
candidates to the appropriate School Management Committee and the Board of Graduate 
Studies  for  approval  in  accordance with  Section 3.20.1  to  3.20.4. After  the  title  of  the 
dissertation  or  thesis  has  been  approved,  it  may  not  be changed  except  with  the  written 
permission  of  the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  on the  recommendation  of  the  Department 
and the appropriate School Management Committee. 
 
3.33.2 After  completing  his/her  course  of  study,  the  candidate  shall  submit  to  the  Board of 
Graduate    Studies    through    the    Head    of    Department    a long    essay/project 
work/dissertation/thesis which shall comply with the following conditions: 
 
3.33.3  Each  copy  of  the  thesis/dissertation/long  essay/ project  work  shall  be  signed  by  the 
candidate and the supervisor(s). 

34 
 
 
3.33.4  A  thesis  or  dissertation  not  signed  as  such  must  be  accompanied  by  a  letter from 
supervisor(s) explaining the reason for the thesis not being signed. 
 
3.33.5  The  greater  portion  of  the  work  submitted  must  have  been  done  subsequent  to  the 
registration of the student as a candidate for a Masters degree. 
 
3.33.6  Unless otherwise specified, the dissertation or thesis shall normally be written in English 
and the presentation of the dissertation or thesis must conform to the prescribed format. 
 
3.33.7  A dissertation/thesis  submitted  shall  consist  of  the candidate’s own account of his/her 
research.  There  shall  be  a  Declaration  to  the effect  that  the  thesis/dissertation  is  the 
candidate’s  own  work  produced  from research  undertaken  under  supervision.  It  may 
describe  work  done  in  conjunction with the candidate’s Supervisor provided that  the 
candidate  states  clearly  his/her share  in  the  investigation  and  that  his/her  statement  is 
certified by the Supervisor. Work done conjointly with persons other than the candidate’s 
Supervisor shall be accepted as a thesis in special cases only; in such cases, the approval 
of  the School Management  Committee and  of  the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  shall  be 
required. 
 
3.33.8  A  candidate  shall  not  be  permitted  to  submit  a  dissertation  or  thesis  for  which  a degree 
has  been  conferred  in  this  or  any  other  university.  However,  a  candidate shall  not  be 
precluded from incorporating his/her published work based on the thesis research. 
 
3.33.9  A  paper  written  or  published  in  the  joint  names  of  two  or  more  persons  shall  not, 
normally, be accepted as a thesis. 
 
3.34  LAPSED THESIS/DISSERTATION 
 
3.34.1  Where a candidate fails to complete an MA/MPhil thesis/dissertation within the required 
period  including  extension,  the  dissertation/thesis  shall  be  deemed  to have  lapsed  and 
cannot be submitted. 
 
3.34.2  Such  a candidate  may,  however,  apply  for  re-admission  to  his/her  programme.  If 
recommended  by  the  Department  for  re-admission,  the  candidate  shall  be  admitted for 
one semester in the case of an MA, and two semesters in the case of an MPhil. 
 
3.34.3  The above shall apply only on  condition that the candidate has satisfied all course work 
requirements  of  the  programme and  passed  his/her  course  work  not  later  than  two  (2) 

35 
 
semesters by the time of application for re-admission with respect to MA candidates and 
four (4) semesters in respect of MPhil candidates. 
 
3.35 DEADLINES FOR SUBMISSION OF REVISED THESES/DISSERTATIONS 
 
3.35.1 Submission of Revised Thesis/Dissertation Passed subject to Correction 
i.  A  dissertation passed  subject  to  correction  shall  be  submitted to  the  School  of  Graduate 
through the Head of Department within One (1) Month from the date of notification. 
 
ii.  A thesis passed subject to correction shall be submitted to the School of Graduate through 
the Head of Department within Two (2) Months from the date of notification. 
 
iii.  In  all  cases,  a  candidate  who  fails  to  submit  the  revised  dissertation/thesis  within  the 
deadlines stated  above  may  be  granted one  semester  of  extension only and  shall  be 
charged the appropriate extension fees for the semester.  
     
iv.   Beyond the one semester grace period after the stipulated deadlines, the student shall lose 
his/her candidature. 
 
3.35.2 Re-submission of Referred Thesis/Dissertation for Re-examination 
i.   If a dissertation or thesis submitted for a Master’s degree is Referred, the candidate may 
be permitted to re-submit it in a revised form within three (3) months in the case of MA 
and equivalent degree dissertations, nine (9) months in the case of MPhil theses. 
 
ii.   Where  a  dissertation/thesis submitted  for  a  Master’s  degree  is Referred and  is  being 
resubmitted, the candidate shall be required to re-register and pay the appropriate fee(s). 
The re-submitted thesis shall reflect the new date of submission. 
 
3.35.3 Failed Thesis/Dissertation 
 
i. Where a candidate’s thesis/dissertation is declared a failure, the candidate may apply for 
re-admission to his/her programme. Such re-application shall be processed in accordance 
with the provisions under 3.12.2.  
 
iii. A student   shall   not   be   allowed   to   renew   his/her   candidature   one   (1)   year   after 
determination of thesis as failed. 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
 
3.36  PUBLICATION OF RESULTS 
 
3.36.1  Results  of  Semester  examinations  taken  at  the  end  of  each  senester  shall  normally  be 
published by the Registrar before the commencement of the next semester. 
 
3.36.2  The  results  of  thesis/dissertation  shall  normally  be  declared  when  all  the  examination 
processes are completed. 
 
3.36.3  A  result  slip  indicating  the  student’s  performance  in  the  examination  shall  be  made 
available to the student by the Registrar. 
 
3.36.4  Results of graduate degree programmes shall normally be published as follows: 
 
3.36.5  The  Date  of  Award  for  Thesis/Dissertations  submitted  by  31st  July  shall  be July of  the 
year of submission. 
 
3.36.6  The  Date  of  Award for  Thesis/Dissertations  submitted  between  1st  August  and 20th 
December shall be December of the year of submission. 
 
3.36.7  Where  a  candidate  re-sits  a  failed  course  and  passes  it  after  submission  of  his/her 
thesis/dissertation,  the  date  of  award  shall not  precede  the  date  of  passing  written 
examination. 
 
3.37  ELIGIBILITY FOR THE GRADUATE DEGREE 
 
A  higher  degree  appropriately  designated  shall  be  awarded  to  a  candidate  who has  been 
properly  admitted to the  University, has followed the approved  course of  study over the 
period, and who has fulfilled both the University and school/departmental requirements. 
 
3.38  AWARD OF DEGREE 
 
3.38.1  A Masters degree shall not be conferred on a candidate unless the examiners are satisfied 
that  the  dissertation  or thesis  is  worthy  of  endorsement  as a  dissertation  or  thesis 
approved for appropriate higher degree. 
 
3.38.2 The  result  of  examinations  held  in  connection  with  the  award  of    Masters shall  be  laid 
before the Academic Board for approval. Thereafter, the degree shall be conferred under 
the  seal  of  the University  upon  each  successful  candidate  at  a  Congregation  of  the 
University assembled for the purpose. 

37 
 
3.38.3  Candidates  shall  qualify  for  graduation  at  a  congregation  if  they  have  satisfied all  the 
requirements for  graduation by the end of the previous academic  year. A candidate who 
could not fulfil all the requirements by the end of the previous academic year but does so 
in the first semester of the ensuing academic year shall be eligible for the next graduation. 
 
3.38.4  Candidates  who  intend  to  be  presented  at  a  Congregation  must  submit  the corrected 
version of their theses for publication at least six weeks preceding the Congregation. 
 
3.39  CANCELLATION OF AWARD 
 
3.39.1  Notwithstanding  previous confirmation  of  an  award  of  a  degree,  the  Academic Board 
may  at  any  time cancel  an  award,  even  with  retrospective  effect,  if  it becomes  known 
that: 
i.  a candidate had entered the University with false qualifications; 
ii.  a candidate had impersonated someone else; 
iii.  a  candidate  had  been  guilty  of  an  examination  malpractice  for  which  a Grade  Z 
would have been awarded; 
iv.  a  candidate  had plagiarized  material  in  his/her  thesis/dissertation.  (All references 
to other people’s work must be duly acknowledged  in  a student’s dissertation or 
thesis. Failure to do so would be regarded as an act of plagiarism.) 
v.  that there are other reasons that would have led to the withholding of confirmation 
of the award in the first place. 
 
3.39.2  In  any  such  event,  the  decision  of  the  Academic  Board  shall  be  published  on  the 
University Notice Board and the candidate notified. Such cancellation and the reasons for 
it shall be entered on the candidate’s transcript. 
 
3.40  TRANSCRIPT OF ACADEMIC RECORD 
 
At  the  end of  a  student’s  programme,  the  University  shall,  on  the  payment  of  an 
appropriate  fee,  issue  to  the  particular  student  a  complete  transcript  of  his/her academic 
record.  This  transcript  shall  be  marked  Student  Copy  and  shall  reflect all  courses 
attempted and all results obtained. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
APPENDICES 
 
4.  APPENDIX I:  
FORMAT OF DISSERTATION OR THESIS 
 
4.1  All   theses   must   be   prepared   according   to   both   the   University   of   Ghana format 
requirements   and   School/departmental documentation   or   reference   formats.    Such 
formats  must  be  deposited  with  the  School  of  Graduate  Studies.  Where  there  is  conflict 
between  Departmental  style  and  the  University  Style,  the  latter  must  be  satisfied. 
Students must consult the University and School/departmental manuals for details. 
 
4.2  Faculty Format Requirements 
Notwithstanding 4.1, School/departmental formats shall apply to: 
•  Chapter Structure Design 
•  Chapter Headings 
•  Reference Style 
•   Figures and Tables 
•  Chapter Content Design 
•  List of Abbreviations 
 
4.3 University Format Requirement shall consist of the following sections: 
•  Preliminary Information 
•  Substantive Section 
•  Bibliography and Appendices 
 
4.3.1  Preliminary Information 
 
i.  Title Page 
The  title  page  shall  consist  of  the  following  which  should  be  centered following  the 
sample and wording in the Graduate School Manual: 
•  Title of the Thesis 
•  Statement of Submission 
•  Name of Candidate (No Titles) 
•  Student Number (In brackets below the name) 
•  In  partial  fulfillment  (partly  taught  courses,  e.g.  MA  MPhil)  of  the  Requirement 
for the Award of (Relevant Degree, e.g. Master of Philosophy – written out fully) 
•  The date of submission (Month and Year) 
 
 
 

39 
 
ii.  Declaration/Signature Page 
•  A candidate submitting a dissertation or thesis for an Masters degree shall make a 
declaration to the effect that the thesis/ dissertation is his/her own work produced 
from research under supervision. 
•  Signatures: The declaration page shall be signed by the following: 
•  The Candidate 
•  Supervisors 
 
iii.  Abstract 
Every candidate shall present a short abstract of his/her dissertation or thesis of a 
maximum of 2 pages (double spaced). 
 
iv.  Dedication (Optional) 
 
v.  Acknowledgement: (1 page maximum) 
•  The candidate may briefly acknowledge those who made important contributions 
to the success of his/her research and presentation of thesis. 
 
•  Where  the  thesis  has  benefited  from  a  collaborative  project  done  in  conjunction 
with the candidate’s Supervisor(s), this should be dully acknowledged. 
 
vi.  Table of Contents 
A well aligned presentation of preliminary information, chapters with subsections, 
bibliography and appendices of the thesis with relevant page numbers indicated.  
 
vii.  List of Figures/Maps 
A list of figures and maps with their relevant designated numbering and relevant 
pages at which they are located. 
 
viii.  List of Tables 
A  list  of  tables  with  their  relevant  designated  numbering  and  relevant  pages  at 
which they are located.  
 
ix.  List of Abbreviations 
A list of relevant abbreviations and their full rendering occurring in the thesis. 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
4.3.2  Substantive Section 
 
i.  Chapter Structure 
A   thesis   must   consist   of   substantive   Chapters   including   an   introduction, 
intervening    chapters    and    a    concluding    chapter    as    determined    by    the 
School/departmental format   which   has   been   deposited   with   the   School   of 
Graduate Studies. 
 
ii.  Reference Style 
The  reference  style  shall  follow  the School/departmental format  which  has  been 
deposited with the School of Graduate Studies. 
 
iii. Thesis Size 
A  thesis/dissertation  shall  normally  not  exceed  the  following  pages  excluding 
bibliography, figures, tables, photographs, and appendices.  
 
Degree   Research Designation  Number of Pages  
MBA/MPA   Long Essay    60  
MA/MSc  Dissertation/Project   80  
MPhil    Thesis     150  
 
4.3.3  Bibliography and Appendices 
i.  The  bibliography  should  be  placed  at  the  end  of  the  thesis  and  not  after  each 
chapter with the exception of cases where the Departmental format filed with the 
School of Graduate Studies requires this. 
 
ii.  The  order  of  arrangement  of  the  bibliography  and  appendices  should  follow  the 
format  of  the  Graduate  School  Manual,  unless  the  Departmental  format  requires 
an alternative order. 
 
iii.  The   candidate   may   submit,   as   subsidiary   matter   in support   of   his   or   her 
candidature,  any  printed  contributions  to  the  advancement  of  his/her  subject, 
which  he  or  she  may  have  published  independently  or  jointly,  or  any  other 
supporting  material.  In  the  event  of  a  candidate  presenting  material  from  joint 
work, he or she shall be required to state fully his or her own contribution. 
 
4.4  Presentation Format 
i.  Two  (2) typed  or  printed  copies  of  the  dissertation  or  thesis,  using  standard  A4 
paper,  shall  be  submitted  to  the  School  of  Graduate  Studies  through  the  Head  of 
Department for examination.  

41 
 
ii.  Typed thesis should be on only one side of the paper. 
iii.  Margins: When bound all margins of the thesis should be 2.54 cm (1 inch). 
iv.  Font Type & Size: Theses should be typed in New Times Roman Font Size 12. 
v.  Chapter headings should be in New Times Roman Font Size 14 Bold. 
vi.  Font  sizes  for  indented  citations,  graphs,  figures  and  tables  should  not  be  lower 
New Times Roman font size 10. 
vii.  Page Numbers: Page numbers should be centred at the bottom of page throughout 
the thesis.  
viii.  The preliminary pages should be numbered with Roman numerals. 
ix.  Page numbering in Arabic numerals should run through the entire thesis. 
x.  Footnote numbering should run through a thesis. 
xi.  Footnotes NOT Endnotes should be used in all theses. 
 
4.5  Binding 
 
4.5.1  Examination Copy 
i.    A thesis submitted for examination should be bound in soft manila card  cover  (green or 
light blue). The cover should bear the details of the Title Page of the thesis. 
 
ii.    For the purpose of examination, a candidate shall be required to submit two (2) copies of 
his/her Masters degree thesis or dissertation and a soft version in PDF. 
 
4.5.2  Final Copy 
After the dissertation or thesis has been approved, it must be bound in standard form Art 
vellum  or  cloth;  overcast;  edges  uncut.  Three  (3)  final hard copies and  the  PDF  soft 
version of the thesis/dissertation that have been accepted for the award of a Master’s or a 
Doctoral degree shall be distributed as follows: 
 
 One (1) hard  copy  and  the  PDF  version shall  be  sent  to  the  School  of  Graduate 
Studies to be kept by the School;  
 
 The  remaining  two  (2)  copies  shall  be  retained  by  the  candidate’s  Head of 
Department, one of which shall be kept in the Departmental Library and the other 
given to the candidate. 
 
4.5.3  Labelling of Final Copy 
 
i.  Front Cover 
The front cover of the final copy should be lettered boldly in gold (0.5.-1.25cm) with the 
details of the Tile Page of the Thesis. 

42 
 
ii.  Spine 
The spine of the thesis should be lettered boldly up back in gold (0.5 to 1.25cm) with the 
degree, date, name, before the award of the Degree is published by the Registrar. 
 
iii.  Binding Colour Scheme 
The following colour scheme should be used in binding the dissertations/theses: 
 
Degree    Designation     Colour Scheme 
MA/MSc degrees   Dissertation/Long Essay/Projects Wine 
MPhil     Thesis      Green 
PhD/MD/DPhil   Thesis/Set of Publications   Dark Blue 
 
   
iv.  Soft Copy of Abstract 
A soft copy of the abstract of the thesis should be separately submitted. In addition to the 
details in the thesis, this copy should bear the thesis title, the name of the candidate and 
the names of supervisors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
5.  APPENDIX II:  
 
UNIVERSITY EXAMINATIONS 
 
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES 
(Extracts from Regulations Governing University Examinations) 
 
5.1  A  candidate  for  a  University  Examination  must have  followed  the  approved course  as  a 
regular student over the required period, and must have registered for the examination. 
 
5.2  Entry  to  the  Examination  shall  be  by  registration  on  a  form  on  which  the  papers  to be 
written  shall  be  indicated  by  the  title.  The  Registration  Form  duly  endorsed  by the 
Head(s)  of  Department  shall  be  submitted  to the  Academic  Affairs  Directorate not  later 
than six weeks after the commencement of the Semester. 
 
5.3  A candidate shall not be admitted to a University Examination if  
i.   she/he has not been entered for it as stated in 5.2. 
ii.  the  subject  of  the Examination  has  merely  been  audited  unless  the course  had 
been followed previously; 
iii.  she/he owes fees to the University/Hall; 
iv.  she/he is under suspension or has been dismissed from the University. 
 
5.4  It shall be the duty of the candidate to consult the daily time-table (to be made available 
at least 24 hours ahead of time) to ascertain the papers to be written each day and to make 
himself available at the appointed place at least one-half hour before the examination. 
 
5.5  A  candidate  may  be refused  admission  to  a  University  Examination  if  he/she reports  to 
the Examination more than half an hour after its commencement. 
 
5.6  It shall be the responsibility of the candidate to provide for himself/herself a pen, pencil 
and an eraser as needed. It is also his/her responsibility to ensure that he/she is given the 
right question paper and other material needed for the examination. 
 
5.7  An examination candidate shall not bring to the Examination Centre or to the washroom 
of  the  Examination  Centre  or in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the Examination  Centre  any 
book,  paper  or  written  information  or  Cellular/Mobile phones  or  other  unauthorized 
material.  Any  such  material  shall  not  be  deposited at  the  entrance  to  the  Examination 
Room  or  the  Washroom  or  in  the immediate vicinity  of  the  Examination  Centre.  No 
student  shall  enter  the  Examination  Room until  he/she  is  invited  or  called  and/or 
requested to enter the Examination Room. 

44 
 
 
i.  Any candidate who is seen with lecture notes or books or Cellular/Mobile phones or any 
unauthorised  material  in  the  Examination  Centre or  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
Examination  Centre  before  the commencement  of  the  examination  shall  be  deemed  to 
have  committed an  offence,  and  shall  be  banned  from  the  examination  and  awarded  a 
grade X. 
 
ii.  A candidate shall uphold the highest standard of  civility and courtesy in an examination 
centre.  A  candidate  who  flouts  the  instruction(s)  of  a Chief  Invigilator  or  Invigilator  or 
misconducts  himself/herself  in  any manner  to  an  examination  official  at  an  examination 
centre  commits an  offence.  Such  candidate  shall  be  banned  from  the  examination  and 
awarded a grade X. 
 
iii.  A candidate who is suspected of hiding unauthorised material on him/her person may be 
asked by the invigilator to submit to a body search. Refusal to submit to a body search is 
tantamount to misconduct.  
 
iv   An   examination   candidate   shall,   for   the   purpose   of   identification   by   the Chief 
Invigilator/Invigilator,  carry  on  him/her  his/her  student  identity card  on  the  examination 
table to enable the invigilator ascertain the identity of the person writing the examination. 
The  Chief  Invigilator shall  reserve  the  right  to  refuse  any  candidate  without  an  identity 
card entry to the Examination.  
 
v.   A  candidate  who  tries  to  conceal  his/her  identity  by  willfully  writing  the  wrong  index 
number on the answer booklet as against the one signed on the attendance sheet commits 
an offence.     
 
5.8  No communication between candidates is permitted in the examination hall.  
 
i.  A candidate shall not pass or attempt to pass any information or instrument from one to 
another during an examination; 
ii  A  candidate  shall  not  copy  or  attempt  to  copy  from  another  candidate  or engage  in  any 
similar activity. 
iii.  A candidate shall not disturb or distract any other candidate during an examination; 
iv.  Candidates may attract the attention of the Invigilator by raising their hands. 
 
5.9  Smoking or drinking of alcoholic beverages is not allowed in the Examination Room. 
 
5.10  Candidates  may  leave  the examination  room  temporarily,  and  only  with  the express 
permission  of  the  Invigilator.  In  such  cases  the  invigilator  will  be required  to  satisfy 

45 
 
himself  that  a  candidate  does  not  carry  on  his/her  person  any unauthorized  material.  A 
candidate   who   is   allowed to   leave   the   Examination Room   temporarily   will   be 
accompanied  while  outside  the  examination  room  by an  attendant  designated  by  the 
Invigilator. 
 
5.11  A  candidate  who  finishes  an  examination  ahead  of  time  may  leave  the  Examination 
Room  after  surrendering his/her  answer  books.  The  candidate  shall  not  be  allowed to 
return to the Examination Room. 
 
5.12  At the end of each examination, candidates should ensure that they do not take away any 
answer books, whether used or unused, from the Hall. 
 
5.13  Candidates  should  not  in  any  way  interfere  with  the  stapling  in  the  answer  books. Any 
complaints about the answer books should be brought to the attention of the Invigilator. 
 
5.14  A  candidate  who  fails  to  present  himself  at  an  examination  without  satisfactory reason 
shall be awarded a grade X. The award of grade X in a required paper shall mean failure 
not just in that paper but in the examination as a whole. The following shall not normally 
be accepted as reasons for being absent from any paper at a University Examination: 
 
i.  mis-reading the examination time-table; 
ii.  forgetting the date or time of examination; 
iii.  inability to locate the examination hall; 
iv.  inability to rouse oneself from sleep in time for the examination; 
v.  failure to find transport; 
vi.  loss of a relation; 
vii.  pregnancy. 
 
5.15  A  breach  of  any  of  the  foregoing  regulations  made  for  the  conduct  of  University 
Examinations may attract one or more of the following sanctions: 
i.  a reprimand; 
ii.  loss of marks; 
iii.  cancellation  of  a paper  (in  which  case  zero  shall  be  substituted  for  the mark 
earned); 
iv.  withholding of results for a period; 
v.  award of grade X. 
In each case of a breach the particulars and the sanction shall be entered on the student’s 
transcript of academic record. 
 

46 
 
5.16  Further to 5.15, a grade Z leading to failure in the entire Semester’s Examination, shall be 
awarded  wherever  it  is  established  that  a  candidate  had  attempted  to  gain  an  unfair 
advantage  in  an  examination  be  it  in  a  Principal  Subject  or  an  Ancillary or  any other 
paper. Further sanctions may include: 
 
i.  being barred from a University Examination for a stated period; 
ii.  being barred from a University Examination indefinitely; 
iii.  suspension from the University; 
iv.  expulsion from the University. 
 
5.17  Provisional  results  of  University  Examinations  shall  be  posted  on  the  University  Notice 
Boards and on the MIS Web on the University’s Website. It shall be the responsibility of 
the  candidate  to  consult  the  University Notice  Board  for  the  result  of any  examination 
taken.  Alternatively  he/she  may write  to  the  Deputy  Registrar  (Academic  Affairs)  to 
enquire about his/her results or request details of such results for which purpose he may 
provide a stamped addressed envelope. 
 
5.18  A  candidate  who  is  not  satisfied  with  the  results  of  a  University  Examination affecting 
him/her  may  request  a  review  by  submission  of  an  application  to  the Registrar  and 
payment of a review fee which shall be determined at not less than three times the normal 
Examination Fee. 
 
5.19  An application for a review shall be submitted to the Registrar not later than 21days after 
release of the said results and shall state the grounds for review. 
 
5.20  An application entered on a candidate’s behalf by a person other than the aggrieved 
candidate himself shall not be entertained. 
 
5.21  No action shall be taken on an application which is submitted outside the time stipulated. 
Review shall not proceed unless the Review Fee is fully paid. 
 
5.22  The Board of Examiners may authorize the Registrar to amend the results as released in 
the light of the review. 
 
5.23  If  it  emerges  that  a  complaint  is  frivolous  or  ill-motivated,  the  Board  may  prescribe 
further  sanctions  which  may  include  barring  the  complainant  from  taking  a University 
Examination for a stated period or an indefinite period. 
 
 
 

47 
 
6.  APPENDIX III: 
 
UNIVERSITY EXAMINATIONS 
 
EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE OR OFFENCE 
 
6.1.  Examination  offences  shall  be  understood  to  include  any  attempt  on  the  part of  a 
candidate  to  gain  an  unfair advantage,  and  any  breach  of  the  Examination Regulations 
and  Instructions  to  candidates  including  refusal  on  the  part  of  a candidate  to  occupy  an 
assigned  place  in  an  Examination  Room,  any  form  of communication  with  another 
candidate,  possession  of  a  book, paper  or  written information  of  any  kind  except  as 
required by the rules of a particular examination, smoking, leaving an Examination Room 
without permission of the Invigilator, or refusal to follow instructions. 
 
6.2.  The Chief Invigilator or any examiner shall report to the Registrar as soon as practicable 
any  instance  of  a  breach  of  Examination  Regulations.  In  respect  of offences  occurring 
outside  the  precincts  of  an  Examination  Room,  the  Dean shall  cause  an  enquiry  to  be 
made into any reports that reach him and submit his findings to the Registrar. 
 
6.3.  The  Board  of  Examiners  shall  review  all  reports  received  in  connection  with an 
examination  malpractice  or  an  offence.  On  the  basis  of  its  review,  the  Board of 
Examiners may impose a sanction involving loss of marks in a particular paper. A grade 
Z  shall  be  awarded  whenever  it  is  established  that  a  candidate had  attempted  to  gain  an 
unfair  advantage  in  an  examination  be  it  in  a  Principal Subject  or  an  Ancillary  or  any 
other paper or has misconducted himself/herself in an examination. Such a candidate may 
be  debarred  from  taking  a  University Examination  for  a  stated  period  or  indefinitely  or 
expelled from the University. 
 
6.4.  In all instances of examination malpractices or offences a formal report shall be made to 
the  Academic  Board  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  Academic  Board  may review  all  such 
reported cases and may vary the sanctions as it thinks fit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
7.  APPENDIX IV: 
 
LIST OF MASTERS PROGRAMMES 
COLLEGE OF HUMANITIES 
SCHOOL OF LANGUGES 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
 
Arabic      - MA/MPhil 
Conference Interpreting    - MA   
Contemporary English Studies   - MA 
English      -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
French       -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
Linguistics      -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
Russian      -  MA/MPhil 
Spanish      -  MA/MPhil 
Teaching of English as a Second Language     -          MA/MPhil/PhD 
Translation      -  MA 
 
SCHOOL OF ARTS 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Classics                -  MPhil 
Museum & Heritage Studies      -  MA/PhD 
Archaeology        -  MPhil/PhD 
History            -        MPhil/PhD 
Philosophy       -        MPhil/PhD 
Study of Religions                    -  MPhil/PhD 
 
SCHOOL OF PERFORMING ARTS 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Theatre Arts      -  MA/MFA/MPhil 
Music       -  MA/MPhil 
 
SCHOOL OF SOCIAL SCIENCES 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Economic Policy Management    -  MA 
Economics      - MPhil 
Development Economics   - PhD 
Social Work     -  MPhil 
Geography & Resource Development  -  MPhil/PhD 
Psychology     - MPhil/PhD 
Political Science     -  MPhil/PhD 
Sociology     -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
 
 
 

49 
 
INSTITUTE OF STATISTICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC RESEARCH 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Development Studies     -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
 
CENTRE FOR SOCIAL POLICY STUDIES 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Social Policy Studies     -  MA/PhD 
 
INSTITUTE OF REGIONAL POPULATION STUDIES 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Population Studies     -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
 
LEGON CENTRE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DIPLOMACY 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
International Affairs     -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
 
CENTRE FOR MIGRATION STUDIES 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Migration Studies    - MA/MPhil/PhD 
 
INSTITUTE OF AFRICAN STUDIES 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
African Studies     -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA BUSINESS SCHOOL REGULAR 
MA/MSc/MBA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Development Finance (Special Programme)   -  MSc 
Management and Administration              -  MA 
Information Systems                 - PhD 
Operations Management   - MPhil 
Management Information Systems   -  MBA/MPhil 
Health Services Management    -  MBAMPhil 
Human Resource Management    -  MBA/MPhil 
Public Administration     -  MPA/MPhil 
Marketing      -  MBA/MPhil/PhD 
Accounting      - MBA/MPhil/PhD 
Finance      -  MBA/MPhil/PhD 
Public Administration and Policy Management -   PhD 
Health Policy and Management   - PhD 
Risk Management and Insurance  - MPhil  
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA BUSINESS SCHOOL SPECIAL, WEEK-END AND EXECUTIVE 
MASTER OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION PROGRAMMES 
Accounting     - MBA  
Finance                                                     -            MBA /EMBA 
Health Services Administration    -  MBA  

50 
 
Human Resource Management    -  MBA /EMBA 
Management Information Systems   -  MBA 
Marketing      -  MBA/EMBA 
Public Administration     -  MPA  
Project management    - EMBA 
Entrepreneurial Management   - EMBA 
Accounting and Financial Services Management  - EMBA         
 
SCHOOL OF LAW 
 MA/LLM REGULAR PROGRAMMES  
Alternative Dispute Resolution   -  MA 
Human Rights and Administration   -  MA 
#Alternative Dispute Resolution   -  LLM 
#Oil and Gas Law     -  LLM 
# International Human Rights & International Humanitarian Law    -   LLM 
 #for persons with degrees in law only 
 
COLLEGE OF EDUCATION 
SCHOOL OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION STUDIES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Information Studies     -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
Communication Studies    -  MA/MPhil/PhD 
 
SCHOOL OF CONTINUING AND DISTANCE EDUCATION 
MA/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
 
Distance Education & E-Learning (Distance) - MA 
Adult Education    -  MA/MPhil 
HIV/AIDS Management (Distance)  -           MA/MPhil 
Adult Education & Human Resource Studies - PhD 
                
COLLEGE OF BASIC AND APPLIED SCIENCES 
SCHOOL OF PHYSICAL AND MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES 
MSC/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES  
Petroleum Geoscience               -  MSc 
Mineral Exploration    - MSc 
Engineering Geology                                            -           MSc/MPhil 
Earth Science     -  PhD 
Geology     - MSc/MPhil 
Hydrogeology     - MSc/MPhil 
Economic Geology    - MSc/MPhil 
Applied Geophysics    - MSc/MPhil 
Applied Geochemistry    - MSc/MPhil 
Chemistry      -  MPhil/PhD 
Physics      -  MPhil/PhD 

51 
 
Statistics      -  MPhil/PhD 
Actuarial Science    - MSc/MPhil 
Computer Science    - MSc/MPhil/PhD 
Mathematics     - MPhil 
 
SCHOOL OF BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
MSC/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Fisheries Management    - MSc 
Coastal Zone Management   - MSc 
Aquaculture     - MSc 
Molecular Biology    - MPhil 
Biochemistry      -  MSc/MPhil/PhD 
Molecular Cell Biology of Infectious Diseases - MPhil/PhD 
Zoology        -  MPhil 
Biodiversity & Conservation Science  - PhD 
Applied Parasitology    - PhD 
Botany       -  MPhil/PhD 
Food Science           -  MPhil/PhD 
Nutrition      -  MPhil/PhD 
Marine Science      - MPhil/PhD 
Fisheries Science    - MPhil/PhD 
 
INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENT AND SANITATION STUDIES 
MSC/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES 
Environmental Science    - MPhil/PhD 
 
 SCHOOL OF NUCLEAR AND ALLIED SCIENCES 
MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES  
Nuclear Science and Technology  - MPhil 
Applied Nuclear Physics    -  MPhil/PhD 
Computational Nuclear Sciences & Engineering -  MPhil/PhD 
Medical Physics     -  MPhil/PhD 
Nuclear Agriculture     -  MPhil/PhD 
Nuclear Earth Science     -  MPhil/PhD 
Nuclear Engineering     -  MPhil/PhD 
Nuclear & Environmental Protection   -  MPhil/PhD 
Nuclear and Radiochemistry    -  MPhil/PhD 
Radiation Processing    -  MPhil/PhD 
Radiation Protection     -  MPhil/PhD 
Nuclear Technology Applications in Petroleum and Mining Industries - MPhil 
SCHOOL OF AGRICULTURE  
MSC/MPHIL/PHD PROGRAMMES  
Family & Consumer Sciences (Textiles and Clothing) PhD 
Extension & Livelihood Studies   - MSc 
Home Science      -  MPhil 
Agricultural Economics    -  MPhil 
Agribusiness      -  MPhil/ PhD 
Agricultural Extension     -  M.Agric/MPhil/PhD 

52 
 
Animal Science     -  M.Agric/ MPhil/PhD 
Crop Science      -  M.Agric/ MPhil/PhD 
Soil Science      -  M.Agric/ MPhil/PhD 
Agricultural Administration    -  M.Agric/MPhil/PhD 
Applied Agricultural Economics & Policy -  PhD 
Entomology     - MPhil/PhD (ARPPIS)  
                    
SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING SCIENCES 
MENG/MPHIL/PhD PROGRAMMES  
Computer Engineering    - MEng/MPhil/PhD 
Agricultural Engineering   -  MEng/MPhil/PhD 
Biomedical Engineering    - MEng/MPhil/PhD 
Materials Science Engineering   - MEng/MPhil/PhD 
 
COLLEGE OF HEALTH SCIENCES 
SCHOOL OF BIOMEDICAL AND ALLIED HEALTH SCIENCES 
MSC/MPHILPROGRAMMES  
Medical Ultrasonography      -      MSc 
Dietetics      -  MSc 
Audiology                          -           MSc 
Medical Laboratory Sciences   - MSc 
Haematology      -  MPhil 
Immunology      -  MPhil 
Medical Biochemistry    -  MPhil 
Microbiology     -  MPhil 
Pathology      -  MPhil 
Chemical Pathology     -  MPhil 
Physiology      -  MPhil 
Anatomy     -  MPhil 
 
SCHOOL OF PHARMACY 
MPHIL/PHDPROGRAMMES  
Pharmacology                            -           MPhil 
 
SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
MSC/MPHILPROGRAMMES  
Applied Health Social Science    -  MSc 
Clinical Trials      -  MSc 
Occupational Medicine    - MSc 
Occupational Hygiene    - MSc 
Health Informatics     -  MHI 
Applied Epidemiology and Disease Control - MPhil 
Public Health       -  MPH/PhD 
 
SCHOOL OF NURSING 
MSC/MPHILPROGRAMMES  
Nursing      -  MSc/MPhil                              
 
 

53 
 
Graduate Programmes of Affiliate Institutions 
 
The  School  of  Graduate  Studies  currently oversees the running  of  the following  Master’s 
programmes at its affiliate institutions.  The programmes are governed by the rules and regulations 
applicable to Master’s degree programmes at the University of Ghana. 
 
MA Ports and Shipping Admin  -  Regional Maritime University 
MA International Affairs  - Ghana Armed Forces Command Academy  
MBA Thesis Option   - Methodist University College 
MPhil Guidance and Counselling - Methodist University College 
MBA     - Wisconsin Int. University College 
MBA/MCom    - Pentecost University College 
MA Pentecostal Studies  - Pentecost University College 
MA Christian Ministry and Management Christian Service University College 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
8.  APPENDIX V 
 
(SAMPLE COVER PAGE MASTERS THESIS/DISSERTATION) 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA 
COLLEGE OF HUMANITIES 
 
 
  
SERIAL VERB NOMINALIZATION IN DAGBANI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KWASI ASIMESI 
(NO MENTION OF TITLES OR PREVIOUS DEGREES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LINGUISTICS 
 
JULY 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
9. APPENDIX VI 
 
 (SAMPLE TITLE PAGE FOR MASTERS THESIS/DISSERTATION) 
 
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA 
COLLEGE OF HUMANITIES 
 
 
 
 SERIAL VERB NOMINALIZATION IN DAGBANI 
 
 
 
 
BY 
 
KWASI ASIMESI 
(NB: NO MENTION OF TITLES OR PREVIOUS DEGREES) 
 
(ID. NO. 1012131415) 
 
 
 
 
 
A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES IN PARTIAL 
FULFILMENT OF THE AWARD OF DEGREE OF MASTER OF PHILOSOPHY IN LINGUISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LINGUISTICS 
 
JULY 2014