UNIVERSITY OF GHANA  
LEGON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HANDBOOK FOR DOCTORAL STUDIES 
 
AND 
REGULATIONS GOVERNING GRADUATE STUDY 
AND UNIVERSITY EXAMINATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School of Graduate Studies 
Published in 2014 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA 
LEGON 
 
 
(Motto: Integri Procedamus) 
 
Established: AD 1948 
 
 
 
THE ARMS OF THE UNIVERSITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blue shield with three “AYA” standing 
Upright in top half and “DWENINMENTOASO” 
In the middle of bottom half – all embossed 
in gold. (Designed by A.M. Opoku) 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE UNIVERSITY 
 
THE UNIVERSITY OF GHANA
 was founded in 1948 as the University College of the Gold Coast 
on the recommendation of the Asquith Commission on Higher Education in the then British colonies. 
The Asquith Commission, which  was  set up in 1943 to investigate  Higher Education, recommended 
among  other  things,  the  setting  up  of  University  Colleges  in  association  with  the  University  of 
London. This was followed up by a number of separate Commissions in different regions. The West 
Africa   Commission   was   under   the   Chairmanship   of   the   Rt.   Hon.   Walter   Elliot.   The   Elliot 
Commission  published  a  majority  report  which  recommended the  establishment  of  two  University 
Colleges  in  the  Gold  Coast  (Ghana)  and  Nigeria,  and  a  minority  report  which  held  that  only  one 
University College for the whole of British West Africa was feasible. The British Government at first 
accepted the minority report of the  Elliot Commission and  decided  that a  University College  for the 
whole of British West Africa should be established at Ibadan in Nigeria.  But the people of the  Gold 
Coast  could  not  accept  this  recommendation.  Led  by  the  scholar  and  politician, the  late  Dr.  J.B. 
Danquah,  they  urged  the  Gold  Coast  Government  to  inform  the  British  Government  that  the  Gold 
Coast could support a University College. The British Government accordingly reviewed its decision 
and agreed to the establishment of the University College of the Gold Coast. 
 
The  University  College  of  the  Gold  Coast  was  founded  by  Ordinance  on  August  11,  1948 
for  the 
purpose  of  providing  for  and  promoting  university  education,  learning  and  research
.  Its  first 
Principal  was  the  late  Mr.  David  MowbrayBalme.  Mr.  Balme  was  farsighted,  courageous  and 
dedicated to the promotion of scholarship. By his vision, industry and single-mindedness of purpose, 
he built a college and laid the foundations for a sound University which is now a source of pride. In 
his ten years of principalship, he created an institution whose key-note was orderly living with dignity 
in  a  community  of  scholars.  One  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Asquith  Commission  was  that  the 
British  Government  should  set  up  an  Inter-Universities  Council  to  advise  on  all  matters  relating  to 
Higher  Education  in  the  new  British  Colonies.  The  Inter-Universities  Council  served  the  new 
University  College  of  the  Gold  Coast  in  an  advisory  capacity,  but  it  approved  all  academic 
appointments.  This  arrangement  helped  the  College  to  maintain  the  high  academic  standards 
associated  with  the  Universities  in  Britain.  Also,  it  enabled  the  College  to  seek  the  support  of  the 
Council in obtaining funds from the United Kingdom Government sources. 
 
From its inception, the University College of the Gold Coast was admitted to the Scheme of Special 
Relationship  extended  by  the  University  of  London  to  certain  English  and  overseas  University 
Colleges.  Under  this  scheme,  the  University  College  was  allowed  to  teach  for  the  external degree 
examinations  of London University.  It also  allowed  the  College  to  modify  the  London syllabuses  to 
suit  local  conditions  and  to  take  part  in  the  setting  and  marking  of  examinations.  But  London 
University gave final approval for courses and examinations since the degrees given were those of the 
University of London. For thirteen years, therefore, the University College looked up to two separate 
institutions in Great Britain: to the Inter-Universities Council for guidance on its broad policy, and to 
the  University  of  London  for  approval  and  control  of  details  of  degree  regulations.  The  University 
College benefitted greatly from this arrangement which certainly helped to maintain its high academic 
standards. 
 
In the  1960-61 academic  year, the  College  Council made a  request to the  Government of Ghana for 
legislation  to  constitute  the  University  College  into  a  University  with  the  power  to  award  its  own 
degrees.  The  Government  appointed  an  International  Commission  to  examine  the  problem.  On  the 
recommendations of that Commission, the University of Ghana was set up by an Act of Parliament on 
October  1,  1961  (Act  79).  The  then  President  of  the  Republic  of  Ghana,  Dr.  Kwame  Nkrumah, 
became the first Chancellor of the University, with Nana Kobina Nketsia IV, Omanhene of Essikado, 
as the (Interim) Vice Chancellor.   
 
 
 

7 
 
PRECINCTS 
 
The campus of the University lies about 13 kilometres north-east of Accra, the capital of Ghana, at an 
altitude  of  between  90 and  100  metres.  From  the  Main  University  Gate  on the  Dodowa  Road,  the 
University Avenue extends to Commonwealth Hall on Legon Hill.  
 
Along  it  are  grouped  other  Halls  of  Residence,  Departments,  lecture  theatres  and  laboratories.  Mid-
way,  an  open  space - the  University  Square - with  an  ornamental  pool  is over-looked  by  the  Balme 
Library  (named  after  David  Mowbray  Balme,  the  first  Principal  of  the  University  College).  Across 
from  the  University  Square  are  sports  fields,  a  Central  Cafeteria  and  halls  of  residence.  Behind 
Commonwealth  Hall  is  an  open-air  theatre  with  a  Grecian  style  auditorium  built  into  the  slope  of 
Legon  Hill.  On  the  summit  of  Legon  Hill  is  the  Convocation  Group  of  Buildings  which  houses  the 
University’s administration offices, the Great Hall, with a seating capacity of 1,500 and a Tower 
donated  by  the  Government  of  Ghana  in  1959  to  commemorate  Ghana’s  Independence.  On  the 
southern side of the campus are residential accommodation for staff, the University Basic Schools, the 
Noguchi  Memorial  Institute  for  Medical  Research,  School  of  Public  Health,  the  Sports  Stadium,  a 
night  market,  supermarket  and  student  hostels;    while  on  the  Northern  side  are  more  teaching 
departments,  lecture  theatres  and  laboratories.  Across  the  Accra-Dodowa  road  from  the  Main 
University  Gate  is  a  Police  Station,  a  University  Hospital  and  housing  for  Junior  Staff  of  the 
University. 
 
The  College  of  Health  Sciences  has  its  administration  as  well  as  the  Medical/Dental  /Allied  Health 
Sciences  and  Pharmacy  Schools  located  at  the  Korle-Bu  Teaching  Hospital,  which  is  about  three 
kilometres  west  of  the  centre  of  Accra,  and  about  18  kilometres  from  the  main  University  campus.  
The Accra City Campus of the University, located close to the business district of the nation’s capital, 
was established to provide part-time education for mature persons and for persons who prefer not to 
study full time.  There is also the Graduate School of Nuclear and Allied Sciences, a constituent of the 
College of Basic and Applied Sciences located at the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission, Kwabenya, 
Accra. 
 
THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
 
The unit responsible for coordinating graduate studies is the School of Graduate Studies. The School 
is headed by a Dean, assisted by a Vice-Dean and an Executive Secretary.  The School is responsible 
for  graduate  admissions,  registration  and  orientation,  student  records,  approval  of  thesis/dissertation 
supervisors    and    examiners,    thesis/dissertation    topics,    examination    of    theses/dissertations, 
accommodation  for  graduate  students,  processing  of  applications  for  government  bursaries/grants, 
approval  of  results  and  graduation.    The  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  has  three  Sub-Committees: 
Graduate Programmes Development and Admissions Committee, Graduate Examinations Committee 
and PhD Technical Committee. The Graduate Programmes Development and Admissions Committee 
has  oversight  responsibility  for  admissions,  approving  new  graduate  programmes,  accreditation  of 
faculty to teach graduate level courses and supervise graduate research.  The Graduate Examinations 
Committee has oversight responsibility for approving examiners, examining theses and dissertations, 
determining  thesis  and  dissertation  results,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  performance  on  graduate 
programme  delivery.    The  PhD  Technical  Committee  was  established  primarily  to  support the 
implementation of the University’s four year PhD programme structure. The Committee has oversight 
responsibility  for issues  related  to  PhD  studies  coordinated  by  the  School of  Graduate  Studies.   The 
School  also  conducts  research  skills  enhancement  workshops  for  graduate  students  and  research 
supervisors.  There are separate Handbooks for Masters’ and Doctoral studies.  
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS 
FOR DOCTORAL DEGREE PROGRAMMES 
 
 
3.1  GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
3.1.1 The academic calendar is organized into semesters. Programmes are made up of courses 
which  are  coded  by  levels  of  academic  progression  and  are  assigned  credits.  Each  course  is 
examined at the end of the semester. 
 
3.1.2   Each   academic   unit   shall   provide   detailed   information   about   the   structure   of 
programmes  leading  to  the  award  of  graduate  degrees  in  that  unit  and  offer  advice  and 
counselling to students. 
 
3.1.3 It shall be the responsibility of each student of the University to know both the specific 
requirements  of  the  graduate  degree  for  which  he/she  is  registered  as  well  as  the  rules, 
regulations and policies of the University and the relevant academic unit. 
 
3.1.4  It  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  each  student  to  ensure  that  the  courses  selected  satisfy 
the requirements for the award of the graduate degree sought. 
 
3.1.5  Every  student,  by  the  act  of  registering,  agrees  to  abide  by  all  rules,  regulations  and 
policies of the University and of the relevant academic unit. 
 
3.1.6  Each  student  is  required  to  acquaint  himself/herself  with  the  general  information 
outlined  in  this  Handbook  and  any  relevant  information  from  the  academic  unit(s)  in  which 
he/she  is  enrolled.  Students  may  consult  their  Head  of  Department  or  the  Dean  of  Graduate 
Studies for additional information. 
 
3.1.7 Exemption from any of these General Regulations may be granted only by the express 
permission of the Academic Board on the recommendation of the Board of Graduate Studies 
and the appropriate School/Faculty Board. 
 
3.1.8  The  University  reserves  the  right  to  change  rules,  regulations  and  policies,  as  well  as 
programme and course requirements outlined in this handbook without prior notice. 
 
3.1.9      Further  information  relating  to  the  content  of  this  Handbook  may  be  found  on  the 
University’s website – www.ug.edu.gh 
 
 
3.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMISSION   
 
3.2.1 APPLICATION 
 
3.2.1.1  Applications for  admission  to  programmes  shall normally be  through  an  online  facility.   Forms 
for  three  referees’  reports,  transcripts  and doctoral  research  proposal, certified  copies  of 

13 
 
certificates  shall  be  provided  along  with  the  main  application  forms. However,  in  exceptional 
cases,   completed application   forms, referees’  reports,  transcripts  and  certified  copies  of 
certificates  shall  be  sent  directly  to  the  Dean,  School  of  Graduate  Studies  or  submitted  by  the 
applicant in a sealed, signed and stamped envelope. 
3.2.1.2 Applicants may, in exceptional cases, request for application forms from the School of Graduate 
Studies through the same address stated below for submission of completed application forms. 
 
3.2.2 SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION 
 
3.2.2.1 Application  forms shall  normally  be  submitted  on-line.  Where  the  completed  application  forms 
must  be  submitted  in  hard  copy,  the  physical/postal  address  to  which  the  documents  should  be 
sent is:  
 
 The Dean of Graduate Studies 
 Frederick Marfo Memorial Building 
 University of Ghana 
 P.O. Box LG 571 
 Legon, Ghana 
 E-Mail      - dgs@ug.edu.gh 
 Telephone - (233-030) 2500793 (Office of the Dean) 
                     (233-030) 2925798 (Admissions Office) 
 
3.2.2.2 Applications shall be considered in the first instance by the academic unit in which the applicant 
wishes to study. 
 
3.2.2.3  The  academic  unit  shall satisfy  itself  of  the  suitability  of  the  candidate  and  the  availability  of  
physical, material  and  human resources for the successful completion of the candidate’s work. 
An  interview  and/  or  a  qualifying  examination  may  be  administered  by  the  Department/ 
Centre/Institute to determine the suitability of an applicant. 
 
3.2.2.4 The  Head  of  the  academic  unit  shall  submit  in  writing  to  the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  a 
statement on the suitability or otherwise of each applicant. 
 
3.3. ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS  
Admission requirements and progression in the PhD programme are outlined below: 
 
3.3.1. Candidates applying with a first degree.  
 
i. Candidates  with  a  good  first  degree  may  apply for  admission into a PhD 
programme. 
ii. The first  degree holder applicants  will  be  given  conditional  admission  letters 
by the School of Graduate Studies. 
iii. They shall take prescribed courses (Level 600 courses) in the first year. 
iv. On completion of the Level 600 courses, candidates will be assessed, and may 
progress into PhD depending on performance; 

14 
 
v. Candidates  who are  not  able  to progress  into PhD will  undertake  their MPhil 
thesis  research  and  on  successful  completion,  will  be  awarded  an  MPhil 
degree. 
vi. Candidates  who  progress  into  PhD  will  be  given  conditional  admission into 
the PhD programme. They shall take Level 700 courses and continue to fulfill 
the requirements as outlined in Section 3.3.2. 
vii. Candidates  who  are  unable  to  meet  the  criteria  for the  M.Phil  degree may  be 
offered  the  option  to  undertake an  MA/MSc.  dissertation.  They  will  be 
awarded MA/M.Sc. degree upon successful completion. 
 
3.3.2. Candidates applying with a Master's degree  
(e.g. MA/MSc/MPH/MBA/MPhil) 
i. Candidates with a Masters degree may apply into a PhD programme. 
ii. Such  candidates  will  be  given  conditional  admission  letters  by  the  School  of 
Graduate Studies. 
iii. They  shall  take  prescribed  courses  (Level  700  courses)  in  Year  1 as  well  as 
"make-up courses", as necessary, in Years 1 and 2. 
iv. Candidates  will  be  assessed  on  successful  completion  of  the  prescribed 
courses, and may progress to the PhD depending on performance. 
v. Candidates  who  qualify  to  progress  to  PhD  will  be  admitted  to  the  PhD 
programme. 
vi. Candidates who are unable to meet the criteria may be offered the option to do 
an  MPhil,  in  which  case,  they  shall  proceed  to  undertake an  MPhil  thesis 
research. 
 
 
3.4 PROCEDURE FOR ADMITTING APPLICANTS INTO PHD PROGRAMMES  
 
The  procedures  outlined  below  shall  be  followed in  admitting applicants into  all PhD 
programmes. 
 
 
3.4.1 Entry point (screening at Academic Unit level) 
Persons applying to pursue a programme leading to the award of a PhD shall: 
i.     Take   an   entrance   examination,   comprising   a   written   examination   and   an   oral      
presentation and; 
ii.    Attend an interview organized at the departmental level by the Departmental Graduate 
Studies Committee. 
3.4.2. Progression from Course Work to PhD  

15 
 
Students  will  progress  to  the  PhD candidature after  passing  written  examination  on 
their course work and comprehensive examination (3.11.2).  
 
3.4.3. Year Two Programmes – Experiential Research Learning 
3.4.3.1 All PhD candidates shall be required to spend 6 to 12 months of the PhD Year 2 in an    
internship or experiential learning programme. The opportunities and types of projects 
or activities available will vary from one Academic Unit to the other.  
 
3.4.3.2 Each  Academic  Unit  in  consultation  with  the  candidate  shall  provide  details  of  what 
the student will do within the internship Year to the School of Graduate Studies.  This 
must   be   submitted   before   commencement of   experiential research   learning 
programme. 
 
3.4.3.3 Within six weeks to the end of Year 2, the student shall produce a written report and 
present  a  seminar  (Seminar  2)  on  what  she/he  has  done  during  the  year.  The  report 
and seminar shall be graded by the Departmental Graduate Studies Committee and the 
student's  supervisor(s)  and  the  grade  shall  be  submitted  to  the  School  of  Graduate 
Studies. 
3.4.3.4 The  list  below  gives  examples  of  the  activities  that  students  may  undertake  in  the 
internship year. 
i. Attachment to industry or professional placement for a period 
ii. Internal arrangements to attach PhD students to ongoing projects 
iii. Participation in colloquia, conferences, seminars to present papers 
iv. Development of research proposals 
v. Working with Professors on specific projects 
vi. Acquiring specific techniques and expertise  
vii. Development of methodologies to be used in the PhD research  
viii. Development of experimental protocols 
ix. Participation in special courses in transferrable skills 
x. Participation in doctoral academy modules 
xi. Visit partner universities/laboratories to participate in selected programmes or 
research 
xii. Participate in laboratory rotations where applicable 
xiii. Action research (e.g. community projects) in the humanities 
 
3.5 COURSE OF STUDY 
 A candidate who is admitted to a graduate programme  shall be required to follow the approved 
course  of  study  over  the  prescribed  period. Students  must  be  regular  and  punctual  for  their 
academic  work  over  the  period  of  their  candidature  in  the  academic  unit  unless  otherwise 
permitted by the Head in writing. 
 
3.6 ACADEMIC SESSION 
 The regular academic session shall comprise two semesters, as follows:   

16 
 
 First Semester  -   August  - December 
 Second Semester  -   January/February - May/June 
 
There shall be two enrolment sessions in January and August of the same year. 
 
 
3.7  GRADUATE STUDIES COMMITTEE 
3.7.1   A Graduate Studies Committee shall be set up in each academic unit offering graduate 
programmes  with  the  core  responsibility  of  overseeing  all  aspects  of  graduate 
programme delivery in the academic unit.  
 
3.7.2   The functions of the Committee shall be to:  
 
i. advise the students in the selection of courses and formulation of thesis areas 
and titles, and dissertation titles. 
ii.  recommend thesis/dissertation supervisors.  
iii.     submit at  the  end  of  each  semester  progress  report  on  each  student  to  the 
Board of Graduate Studies through the Head of the academic unit. 
iv.    keep  under  review  and  make  proposals  for  the  overall  development  of 
graduate programmes in the Department. 
v.  ensure the timely submission of dissertation/thesis areas and titles through the 
Head of the academic unit to the School Board. 
 
3.7.3 The Graduate Studies Committee shall be chaired by a full time faculty of professorial 
rank from the academic unit. 
 
 
3.8  REGISTRATION AND ORIENTATION 
 
3.8.1  The  University  requires  all  fresh  students  to  report  at  least  one  week  before  the 
commencement  of  the  academic  year  to  go  through  a  process  of  registration  and 
orientation. 
 
3.8.2   Orientation  is  compulsory  for  all  fresh  students.  Registration  also  takes  place  at  the 
same period, concurrently with orientation.  
 
3.8.3  All  students  must  register  every  semester  for  courses  prescribed  by  their  academic 
unit(s) within the specified period set aside for registration.  
 
3.8.4  No  student  is  permitted  to  register  for  more  than  one  programme  at  the  same  time 
within or outside the University. 
 
3.8.5   All  students  are  required  to  register  through  the  self-help  on-line  registration  facility 
and  submit proof of  registration  to  the  School  of  Graduate  Studies  and  the  relevant 
department(s). 

17 
 
3.8.6  A  penalty  as  may  be  determined  by  the  Academic  Board  from  time  to  time  shall  be 
imposed  on  any  student  who  fails  to  register  during  the  normal  time  stipulated  for 
registration by the University. 
 
3.8.7  A  student  who  fails  to  register  during  the  registration  period  specified  shall  forfeit 
his/her right to register for the semester. 
 
3.8.8  No student shall be permitted to register by proxy. The registration of those involved 
(the  agent  and  potential  beneficiary)  shall  be  nullified.  This  means  that  they  cannot 
pursue  studies  for  that  academic  year.  The  University  reserves  the  right  to  prosecute 
agents who are not students of the University of Ghana. 
 
3.8.9 All  students  must  register  every  semester for  courses  prescribed  by  their  academic 
unit(s).    Doctoral  candidates  who have  progressed  to  the  research  part  and  whose 
programmes do not involve course work must register at the beginning of every year 
throughout the approved duration of their programmes. 
 
 
 
3.9 DURATION OF STUDY PROGRAMMES 
 
3.9.1
 Duration of programmes 
 The following shall normally be the duration for the completion of doctorate degree 
programme. 
 
             Full-Time: 4 years    
             Part-Time: 6 years    
 
3.9.2  Extension of Registration 
i.   Four  (4)weeks  to  the  expiry  of  the  normal  period  for  a  postgraduate  programme,  a 
PhD  student  who  has  still  not  been  able  to  complete  the  programme  may  apply  for 
extension  of  studentship  and  may  be  granted  approval  for  periods  not  exceeding  the 
following: 
 
Full-Time Programmes: 2 years 
Part-Time Programmes: 1 year 
 
ii.   There shall be no further extension of time beyond the above durations. 
 
iii. Applications for extension must be supported by duly endorsed progress reports and a 
recommendation from the supervisor(s) and Head of Department. 
 
  

18 
 
3.10   GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
A PhD student shall be required to satisfy the following requirements to be  
eligible for graduation: 
 
Course work    - 18 – 24 credits 
Four (4) Seminars (3 credits each)  - 12 credits 
Thesis     - 45 credits 
Total     - 75 – 81 credits 
 
3.11   STRUCTURE OF PROGRAMME 
3.11.1  Course work component 
i.   The course work component is designed to ensure that students acquire academic and 
methodological  training  at  the  highest  level.  These  courses  are  expected  to  build  up 
on  knowledge  acquired  from  Master’s  level  courses  with  more  practical  and 
interactive training. PhD programmes shall have defined fields of specialization.  
 
ii.   The course work component will consist of a minimum of 18 and a maximum of 24 
credits.  A  minimum  of  18  credits  must  be  passed  and  this  must  include  all  core 
courses  for  the  programme. There  shall  be  four  core  courses  (two  in  each  semester). 
Up  to  six  (6)  credits  could  be  earned  from  level  600  and  not  more  than  three  (3) 
credits from level 300 or 400.   
 
iii.   The coursework component is expected to improve skills in scientific theory, research 
methodology, qualitative and quantitative analyses.  The component will be made up 
of  Core  and  Elective  courses.  Each  course  will  normally  carry  three  (3)  credit  units.  
Three  (3)  courses,  two  (2)  of  which  must  be  in  advanced  research  methodology, 
qualitative  and  quantitative  analyses  must  be  included  in  the  core  or  mandatory 
courses. For full-time students, it is recommended that the course work component is 
completed during the first year of the PhD programme, while part-time students have 
up to two years to complete this component.  
 
iv.    The   Graduate Studies Committee,   supervisors   and   Head   of   Department in 
consultation  with  the  student will  decide on  most  relevant courses  based  on  their 
previous academic record and proposed area of specialization.  
 
v.    Evaluation  of  course  shall  be  by  a  variety  of  means  including  term  papers,  seminar 
presentations, end of semester examination and other formal and informal interactions. 
 
vi.    A student who fails a course shall be given a second opportunity to re-take the course 
at the next available offering.  Students shall be given one opportunity only to re-take 
a failed course.   If the student is unable to redeem a failed core course at the second 
attempt, he/she shall be withdrawn from the PhD programme.   

19 
 
3.11.2  Comprehensive Examination 
 
Departments  shall  organize  comprehensive  examinations  for  each  doctoral  student  after 
successfully  completing  course  work.    Students  must  pass  the  comprehensive  examination 
before proceeding to the next level.   
 
The comprehensive examination shall be conducted in line with the following guidelines: 
 
3.11.2.1 Timing 
The Comprehensive Examination shall be completed by each PhD student within eight weeks 
of  the  commencement  of  the  first  Semester  of  Year  2  of  the  student's  PhD  programme.  The 
schedule  of  the  examination  for  each  student  shall  be  agreed  by  the  Departmental  Graduate 
Studies   Committee   and   communicated   in   writing   to   the   student   and   the   Head   of 
Department/Academic  Unit  on  or  before  the  first  day  of  the  first  Semester  of  Year  2  of  the 
PhD programme. 
 
3.11.2.2  Format 
The PhD Comprehensive Examination shall be made up of three components, namely: 
 
 a written examination,  
 submission of a review paper or research proposal; and  
 an oral examination. 
 
The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted in three stages within a period 
spanning a maximum of two weeks (starting from the date of the written examination 
and ending with the oral examination) as defined below. The grading of all three 
components of the examination shall follow the grading system defined by the School 
of Graduate Studies for post-graduate degree examinations. 
 
.  i.   The Written Examination 
 
The Written Examination shall: 
 cover theory and methodology in the general discipline; 
 consist of 3-5 questions on a range of topics (the number of questions to be answered 
by the student(s) shall be determined by the examiners).  
 
The Mode of Examination shall be any one of the following: 
 in-class open book examination (at least  three hours); or 
 in-class closed book examination (at least three hours); or 
 take-home examination (maximum one week allowed). 
 

20 
 
An Academic Unit/Department shall decide to adopt any one of the three modes above 
for any particular cohort of students.  The topics (but not the questions) may be given to 
the students ahead of time if the Academic Unit /Department so decides. 
 
ii. Review Paper/Research Proposal 
 
Each PhD student shall be required to submit: 
 
 a publishable review paper; or 
 a research proposal on a specific research question (this must not be the same as the 
student 's intended thesis proposal). 
 
The choice of (i) or (ii) above shall be agreed between the Departmental Graduate 
Studies Committee, the student and his/her Advisor/Principal Supervisor on 
completion of the Year 1 course work examinations. 
 
The length of the review paper or research proposal shall normally be 5,000 - 8,000 
words; Font size 12, Times New Roman, Double spacing. 
 
The  student  shall  submit  three  copies  of  the  review  paper/research  proposal  to  the 
examiners  through  the  Head  of  the  relevant  Department/Academic  Unit  at  least  one 
week prior to the date of the written examination. 
 
The  examiners  shall  grade  the  review  paper/research  proposal  and  bring  this  to  the 
oral examination.  
 
iii. Oral Examination 
The oral examination shall test the student on:  
 general knowledge of the discipline; and 
 the review paper or research proposal. 
 Specific area of intended research for PhD. 
 
A department/academic unit may choose to organize the oral examination at the departmental 
level,  open  to  all  academic  staff  of  the  department  (but  only  the  examiners  shall  grade  the 
student 's performance); or as an interaction between the student and the examiners. 
 
The examiners shall score the candidate's performance in the oral examination 
 
3.11.2.3  Examiners 
All examiners appointed to examine the PhD Comprehensive examinations shall be PhD 
holders and shall not be below the rank of a Senior Lecturer. 
 
  

21 
 
i.    Written Examination 
There shall be two examiners constituted by the Departmental Graduate Studies Committee, 
comprising  the  student's  Advisor/Principal  Supervisor  and  one  other  senior  faculty  (Senior 
Lecturer  and  above)  in  the  relevant  discipline/specialization,  who  will  set  the  examination 
paper and mark independently. 
 
ii.    Oral Examination 
The panel for the oral examination shall be constituted by the Departmental Graduate Studies 
Committee and shall comprise three (3) examiners including the student's Advisor/ Principal 
Supervisor and the Chair of the Departmental Graduate Studies Committee. 
 
 
3.11.2.4 Grading 
 
At  the  end  of  the  oral  examination,  the  examiners  shall  compile  the  student's  scores  in  the 
written  examination,  the  review  paper/research  proposal  and  the  oral  examination,  and 
discuss these to arrive at a decision on a PASS (60% or above) or FAIL (less than 60%). The 
outcome  of  the  examination  shall  be  communicated  by  the  Chair  of  the  Departmental 
Graduate Studies Committee to the student and to the Dean of the School of Graduate Studies 
through  the  Head  of  the  relevant  Department/Academic  Unit not  more  than  one  week  from 
the day of the oral examination. 
 
 
3.11.2.5  Repeating the Comprehensive Examination 
 
A student who does not pass the Comprehensive Examination shall be given only one more 
chance to re-take the examination, and this must be taken before the end of the first Semester 
of the PhD Year 2. A student who fails the Comprehensive Examination after the second 
attempt shall be withdrawn from the PhD programme. 
 
3.11.2.6 PhD Candidate 
 
On passing the Comprehensive Examination, the Dean of the School of Graduate Studies 
shall confirm the status of the student as a PhD candidate.  Notification will be sent to the 
candidate through the head of academic unit. 
 
3.11.3  Seminar Component 
i.   Every  PhD  candidate  shall  be  required  to  attend  seminars  and  also  present  four  (4) 
seminars beginning from the second  year of the period of candidature. Each seminar 
shall carry three credit units. There shall be two seminar presentations in year two (2), 
one  in  year  three  (3)  and  a  final  one  in  year  four  (4). The  breakdown  of  the  four 
seminars is as follows: 
Year 2 – Seminar 1 Research Proposal    

22 
 
Year 2 – Seminar 2 Experiential Research Learning   
Year 3 – Seminar 3 Thesis Progress Report    
Year 4 – Seminar 4 Provisional Thesis Findings Report 
 
ii.    Research Proposal Seminar: 
All students must formally defend their research proposal to ensure that the  
Proposed work   is   relevant,   meaningful,   viable,   feasible   and   capable   of   being 
completed  within  timeframe  and  resource  constraints. Students  shall prepare  a 
proposal to the satisfaction of the supervisory committee. The student will present the 
proposal at  the  first seminar  (Seminar  1)  to  the departmental Graduate Studies 
Committee,  academic  staff  in  the  discipline  and  supervisory  committee.  The  student 
must  pass (obtain  60%  or  above) the  seminar  presentation.  A  student  who  fails  the 
proposal   seminar   after   the   second   attempt   shall   be   withdrawn   from   the   PhD 
programme. 
 
iii. Experiential Research Learning Seminar: 
A student will be required to undergo practical training in research work and present a 
report and a seminar on his/her experiential learning at the end of the second year.   
 
iv. Thesis Progress Report Seminar: 
A student will be required to present progress report on his/her research.  
 
v.  Provisional Thesis Findings Report Seminar: 
A student will be required to present preliminary findings from his/her research. 
 
3.11.4  Thesis Component 
A PhD thesis prepared and presented for examination must bring out the ability of the 
candidate  to  conceive  of  and  conduct  independent  research  and  skills  in  organizing 
and  presenting  findings  on  a  topic  in  a  specific field. The  thesis  shall  be  assigned 
forty-five (45) credit units. 
  
The  thesis  format  must  comply  with  the  guidelines  for  preparing  graduate  thesis. 
Article-style  thesis  will  also  be  accepted  for  doctoral  candidates whose  completed 
thesis  will  consist  of a  number  of  journal-style  manuscripts  or  articles.  This  must  be 
an  option  approved  for  a  Department  or  Programme  by  the  School  of  Graduate 
Studies.  Such thesis must show a unification of a sequence of articles of publishable 
quality around a theme, which is the student’s original work. Article-style thesis must 
be based upon research  carried out by the student while at University of  Ghana. The 
student must be the first author or equivalent for each article included in the thesis. 
           
 
 

23 
 
3.11.5  Summary of programme structure 
A  total  of  75-81  credit  units  would  be  required  for  graduation.  The  breakdown  is  as 
follows: 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.12  INTERRUPTION OF STUDY PROGRAMME 
 
3.12.1  A student registered for the graduate programme shall not break his/her programme of 
study  for  more  than  two  continuous  semesters.  This  means  that  a  student  may 
interrupt his/her study programme for two continuous semesters only. 
 
3.12.2  All  interruptions  must  be  by  express  written  permission  from  the  Dean  of  Graduate 
Studies. A  student  shall  apply at  least  four  weeks  in  advance to  the  Dean  of 
Graduate Studies through the Head of Department, stating reasons why he/she wants 
to  interrupt  his/her  study  programme.  The  student  shall  obtain  written  permission 
from the Dean of Graduate Studies before he/she leaves the University. The Dean of 
Graduate  Studies,  in  giving  approval,  may  consult  with  the Dean  of  the  appropriate 
School and the Counselling and Placement Centre, where necessary. 
 
3.12.3  Interruption  of  programme  is  permissible  on  health  grounds  if  it  is  supported  by  a 
medical report. The report may require certification by the Director of Health Services 
of the University of Ghana. 
 
Structure of Part- time Programme 
 
Years  1 and 2 
Course work                (18-24 credits) 
Year 3:  Seminar 1     (3 credits) 
     Thesis              
Year 4:  Seminar 2     (3 credits) 
     Thesis                       
Year 5: Seminar 3   (3 credits) 
     Thesis              
Year 6: Seminar 4    (3 credits) 
     Thesis             (45 credits)                      
                   Total Credits:    75-81 
 
Structure of Full-time Programme 
 
Year 1 
Semester 1 courses      (9-12 credits) 
Semester 2 courses      (9-12 credits) 
 
Year 2 
   Seminar 1                      (3 credits) 
   Seminar 2                      (3 credits) 
 Thesis                             
Year 3 
Seminar 3                          (3 credits) 
 Thesis                               
Year 4 
Seminar 4                  (3 credits) 
            Thesis                   (45 credits) 
 
             Total Credits:   75-81              

24 
 
3.12.4 A student who breaks his/her studies without permission for more than two continuous 
semesters shall be deemed to have lost his/her studentship. 
 
3.12.5 A  student  who  does  not  go  through  the  approved  procedures  before  interrupting 
his/her studies shall be deemed to have abandoned his/her studentship.  Subsequently, 
such a student shall be withdrawn from his/her registered programme. 
 
 
 
3.13  APPLICATION FOR RE-ADMISSION 
 
3.13.1  Loss of studentship resulting from interruption of study 
 
A student who loses his/her studentship as provided under 3.12.4 may  be allowed to 
apply for re-admission to the University.  
 
3.13.2  Students who fail the thesis component of the PhD degree programme 
 
i.  Where a student’s thesis is declared a failure, the candidate may be allowed to apply 
for  re-admission  to  his/her  programme  within  a  period  not  exceeding one year from 
the date of declaration of results. 
 
ii.  A  student  who  fails  the  thesis  component  and  has  applied  for  re-admission  may  be 
granted waiver of course work, comprehensive examination and experiential research 
learning components. 
 
3.13.3  Lapsed Studentship 
 
i.  Where  a  candidate  fails  to  complete  the  thesis  within  the  required  period 
including extension, the lapsed thesis cannot be submitted. 
 
ii.  The  candidate  may  wish  to  apply  for  re-admission  in  line  with  the  procedure 
outlined in the case of a candidate who failed the thesis component of his/her 
programme. 
 
iii.    Only  candidates  who  have  satisfied  all  course  work  requirements  shall  be 
considered for re-admission. 
 
3.13.4. All  applications  for  re-admission must  be  made  by  completing  the  appropriate 
postgraduate application form during the normal admissions season only and shall be 
considered for admission at the next intake. 
 
3.13.5  There shall be only one opportunity to apply for re-admission. 
 

25 
 
3.14  TRANSFER OF CREDITS 
 
3.14.1  Candidates  approved  for PhD degrees  may,  on  the  basis  of  official  transcripts,  be 
allowed  to  transfer  credits  earned  from  a  taught doctoral degree programme.  A 
student  may  get  a  waiver  for  the  coursework  if  the  contents  of  the course  work 
component of the doctoral degrees are comparable. 
 
3.14.2  A  candidate  who  completes  part  of  the  coursework  in  another  University  may  be 
offered  admission  on  the  basis  of  credits  transferred  to  the  University  of  Ghana, 
provided: 
 
i. The  contents  of  such  programmes  are  deemed  comparable  and  satisfy  the  course 
requirements  of  the  Department  and  Faculty/School  in  which  he/she  seeks  to 
pursue his/her studies. 
ii. The  candidate  shall  take  any  additional  courses  as  may  be  required  by  the 
Department and Faculty/School. 
iii. Such transfers may be considered only after admission of student into programme. 
 
3.15.  COURSE CREDITS 
 
3.15.1  One (1) course credit shall be defined as one hour lecture, or one hour tutorial, or one 
practical session (of 3 hours), or three hours of fieldwork per week for a  semester in 
line with general University policy. 
 
3.15.2  No graduate taught course shall be more than four (4) credit hours. 
 
3.16  CODING AND NUMBERING OF COURSES 
 
3.16.1 All  graduate  degree  courses  shall  have  letter  and  number  codes  beginning  with  four 
letters  signifying  a  Department  or  programme/subject,  followed  by  a  three-digit 
number in the ranges 700-799.  
 
3.16.2  The third digit in the number code shall be: 
 
i.    zero (0), for a course that is offered in both semesters, 
ii.     odd (1, 3, 5, 7, or 9) for a course offered in the first semester, 
iii.     even (2, 4, 6, or 8) for a course offered in the second semester. 
 
3.17    SUPERVISION OF PHD STUDENTS 
 
3.17.1  A  potential  Principal or  Lead Supervisor  must  be  identified  for  all  PhD  students 
before  they  begin  their  programme  through  discussions  with  the  Student,  potential 
supervisor(s)  and  the  Departmental  Graduate  Studies  Committee.  Each  PhD  student 
must  be  assigned  an  Advisor  who  may  or  may  not  be  a  Supervisor,  but  who  will 

26 
 
provide  mentorship  and  guidance to  the  student. An  advisor  must  be  of  professorial 
rank. 
 
3.17.2   A  Supervisor  must  have  taught  or  carried  out  research  in  a  university  or  an 
equivalent  institution  for  at  least  2  years  and  have  a  record  of  research  work  and 
publications. 
 
3.17.3
   Accreditation of Supervisors 
 All  supervisors of doctoral  candidates  shall  be  accredited  by  the  Board  of  Graduate 
Studies.  For this purpose, a form for accreditation of supervisors shall be completed 
by  the  Head  of  Department  for  approval  by  the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  through 
the appropriate Faculty/School Board.  
 
3.17.4 A Supervisory   Committee of   two   (2)   to   four (4)   members   drawn   from   the 
Department,  a local  or foreign  University,  a  cognate  academic  unit  or  research 
institute  shall  be  set  up  and  chaired  by a Lead Supervisor.  The  Committee  shall 
advise  the  student(s)  on  all  thesis-related  matters.    The Lead Supervisor  must  be 
from the department where the candidate is registered
. 
 
3.17.5    It shall be the duty of the Supervisors to hold formal supervisory committee 
 
              meetings at least twice a semester.  Supervisors must submit reports to the Dean of                
              Graduate Studies through the Head of Department at the end of every semester. 
 
3.17.6   The supervisory committee shall be made up of only holders of doctoral degrees or  
              faculty of professorial rank, and at least two members of the committee shall be of a  
              rank not below Senior Lecturer. 
 
3.18   APPROVAL     OF     THESIS AREAS, TITLES, SUPERVISORS AND 
EXAMINERS
  
 
3.18.1  Thesis  areas,  names  and  addresses  of Supervisors shall  be  recommended  by  the 
Departmental Graduate Studies Committee and submitted before the commencement 
of the programme to the School and College Boards.   
 
3.18.2   The  final  thesis  titles,  names  and  full  contact  details  of supervisors, internal  and 
external examiners shall be submitted to the Board of Graduate Studies not later than 
the beginning of the second semester of the year of completion for approval.  
 
3.18.3
 Accreditation of Examiners 
 All examiners of doctoral students shall be accredited.  For this purpose, a form for 
accreditation  of  examiners  shall  be  completed  by  the  Head  of  Department  for 
approval by the Board of Graduate Studies.  
 
3.18.4  Appointment of External Examiners 

27 
 
All   external   examiners   shall   be   appointed   by   the   Academic   Board   on   the 
recommendation  of  departments  through  the  appropriate  School  Boards  and College 
Boards  to the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies.    As  part  of  the  appointment  process,  both 
the  full  and  abridged  curriculum  vitae  of  external  examiners  nominated  shall  be 
submitted to the School of Graduate Studies. 
 
3.18.5  Teaching faculty for graduate programmes 
Teaching   faculty   for   graduate   courses   must   normally   be   PhD   holders   or   of 
professorial rank. 
 
3.19 GRADING SYSTEM FOR COURSE WORK 
 
3.19.1 A student’s performance in a course shall be graded as follows: 
 Grade  Marks (%)        Interpretation  Grade Point 
 
A 80  -  100 Excellent  4.00 
 B+ 70  -    79 Very Good  3.50 
 B 60  -    69 Good  3.00 
 C 50  -    59 Pass  2.00 
 D 30   -    49 Fail  1.50 
 F   0   -    29 Fail  1.00
 
 Z    -  Disqualification    
 I   -  Incomplete with justification  
 Y       -  Continuing           
 X   - Incomplete without justification 
3.19.2 
Grade Point (GP):
 Each Grade shall be assigned equivalent grade point as indicated 
above. The number of (grade) points earned by a student for each course completed 
is  computed  as  the  product  of  the  number  of  credits  for  the  course  and  the  grade 
point equivalent of the grade obtained in that course. 
 
3.19.3 
Cumulative  Grade  Point  Average  (CGPA):
 The student’s cumulative grade point 
average shall be calculated by dividing the total number of grade points obtained, up 
to  any  specified  time,  by  the  total  number  of  credits  for  all  courses  for  which  the 
student has registered up to that time. 
 
3.19.4
 Final Grade Point Average (FGPA): 
 The FGPA shall be the CGPA for all courses 
under consideration calculated up to the end of a student’s academic programme. 
 
3.20. DEFINITION OF GRADES 
 
3.20.1 
Pass Grades:
  Grades A, B+, B and C constitute 
Pass
 grades. 
3.20.2 
Failure Grades:
  Grades D, F, X, Z constitute 
Failure
 grades. 
3.20.3 
Continuing:
  A grade Y (for 
Continuing
) shall be awarded at the end of a semester 
to any student who is taking a course which continues into the next semester. 
3.20.4
 Non-Completion of Course 

28 
 
i. A grade I (for
 Incomplete
) shall be awarded to a student who is unable to complete a 
course for reasons adjudged by the Board of Graduate Studies as acceptable. Such a 
student  shall  be  expected  to  complete  the  course  the  very  next  time  the  course  is 
available. 
ii. A  grade  X  shall  be  awarded  to  a  student  who  is  unable  to  complete  a  course  for 
reasons adjudged by the Board of Graduate Studies as unacceptable. 
3.20.5
 Disqualification 
i.   A   grade Z   denotes 
Disqualification
 from   an   examination   as   a   result   of   an 
examination malpractice or offence, and shall be awarded whenever it is established 
that a candidate had attempted to gain an unfair advantage in an examination.  
ii.   A candidate awarded a grade Z may be barred from taking a University Examination 
for a stated period, or indefinitely, or may be expelled from the University. 
 
iii. A grade Z may be awarded only by the Board of Graduate Studies. 
 
3.21 ELIGIBILITY FOR EXAMINATIONS 
 
3.21.1 A  student  shall  attend  all  such  lectures,  tutorials,  seminars  and  practical and 
undertake  all  other  activities  and  assignments  as  approved  by  the  University  for 
his/her programme. 
 
3.21.2 Each  Department  shall,  with  the  approval  of  the  Academic  Board,  determine the 
requirements   for   the   courses   they   offer.   A   student   who   does   not   fulfill the 
requirements  for  any  course  shall  not  be  allowed  to  take  the  examination  for  that 
course. 
 
3.21.3  Any  student  who  is  absent  for a  cumulative  period  of  25  percent from lectures, 
tutorials,  practical and  other  assignments  prescribed  for  any  course  in  any  semester 
shall  be  deemed  to  have  withdrawn  from  the  course.  Such  a  student  shall  not  be 
permitted to sit for the semester examination. 
 
3.22 REGISTRATION FOR EXAMINATION 
 
3.22.1 Registration  for  a  University  Examination  shall  require  the  endorsement  of  the 
Registration  Form  by  the  Head  of  Department  to  the  effect  that  the  candidate  has 
satisfactorily pursued the approved course(s) of study in each of the subjects offered 
over the prescribed period. A candidate’s registration shall not be valid unless it is so 
endorsed. 
 
3.22.2 Endorsement  as  in  (3.22.1)  shall  be  withheld  if  a  candidate  is  not  deemed  to  have 
followed satisfactorily the approved course of study. In the event of the withholding 
of  an  endorsement,  the  Head  of  Department  shall  request  the  appropriate School 
Board to confirm the action taken, and subsequently communicate same to the Board 
of Graduate Studies for a final decision. 

29 
 
3.23 STUDENT IN GOOD STANDING 
3.23.1 A  student  in  good  standing  shall  be  one  who  would  have  passed  a  minimum  of 18
 
graduate level credits and obtained a Cumulative GPA of at least 2.50
 
at the end of 
the second semester of Year One (full time students) or the second semester of Year 
Two (part time students).  
 
3.23.2 Where a student does not pass the required minimum of 18 graduate level credits as 
stated  in  3.23.1 above,  he/she  shall  be  deemed  not  to  be  in  good  standing  and  shall 
be asked to withdraw. 
 
3.24   RE-TAKING COURSE WORK  
3.24.1  
If a candidate obtains the minimum number of 18 credits required at the end of Year 
One but  fails  in 
not more  than  two  core  courses
,  he/she must  pass  all  such  core 
courses in  the  second  year before taking  the  comprehensive  examination.  The 
student may proceed with the experiential research learning component. 
 
3.25. DEFERMENT OF EXAMINATION 
 
3.25.1 
On grounds of ill-health
  
 A  student,  who  has  satisfied  all  the  requirements  as  specified  in  Section 3.22 but  is 
unable  to  take  the  end  of  semester  examinations  on  grounds  of  ill  health,  shall,  on 
application  to  the  Dean  of  Graduate  Studies,  and  on  provision  of  a  Medical 
Certificate  issued  or  endorsed  by  the  Director  of  University  of  Ghana  Health 
Services, be permitted to defer the examinations, and be allowed to take them at the 
next offering.  
 
3.25.2 
On grounds other than ill-health
  
 In  case  of  deferment  on  grounds  other  than  ill-health,  the  student  shall  apply  to  the 
Dean of Graduate Studies through the Head of Department stating reasons why he or 
she  wishes  to  defer the  examination.    Upon  approval,  the  student  must  take  the 
examination at the next offering. 
3.25.3 In  all  cases  of  deferment  of  examinations,  the  applicant(s)  shall  obtain  written 
responses from the Dean of Graduate Studies.  
 
3.26 FEES 
3.26.1 Fees for tuition, research, residence and examination shall be paid at rates prescribed 
by the Academic Board, and are subject to annual review. 
 
3.26.2 No candidate shall be admitted to an examination unless he or she has discharged all 
obligations  owed  to  the  University,  including  payment  of  the  appropriate  tuition, 
research, residence and examination fees. 
 
3.27  SUBMISSION OF THESIS FOR EXAMINATION 
3.27.1
 
The Head of  academic unit shall submit the thesis titles of all PhD candidates to the
 

30 
 
appropriate School Board  and  the  Board  of   Graduate  Studies  for  approval in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  under  3.18.  After  the  title  of  the  thesis  has  been 
approved,  it  may  not  be  changed  except  with  the  written  permission  of  the  Board  of 
Graduate  Studies  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Department  and  the  appropriate 
School and College Board.
 
 
3.27.2
 
After completing his/her course of study, the candidate shall submit to the Board of  
Graduate  Studies  through  the  Head  of  Department  a  thesis  which  shall  comply  with 
the following conditions:
 
 
i.
 
Each    copy    of    the    thesis    shall    be    signed    by    the    candidate    and    the 
Supervisors/Supervisory Committee. 
 
ii.
 
A thesis not signed as such must be accompanied by a letter explaining the reason for 
the thesis not being signed. 
 
iii.
 
At  least  60  per  cent of the  thesis submitted  must  have  been  done  subsequent  to  the 
registration of the student as a candidate for the doctoral degree. 
 
iv.
 
Unless otherwise specified, the thesis shall normally be written in English. 
 
v.
 
The presentation of the thesis must conform to the prescribed format (Appendix I). 
 
vi.
 
A thesis submitted for a doctoral degree shall consist of the candidate’s own account 
of  his/her  research.  There  shall  be  a  Declaration  to  the  effect  that  the  thesis  is  the 
candidate’s own work produced from research undertaken under supervision.  It  may 
describe work done in conjunction with the candidate’s Supervisor provided that the 
candidate states clearly his/her share in the investigation and that his/her statement is 
certified by the Supervisor.  
 
vii.
 
Work  done  conjointly  with  persons  other  than the candidate’s Supervisor shall be 
accepted  as  a  thesis  in  special  cases  only;  in  such  cases,  the  approval  of  the School 
Board and of the Board of Graduate Studies shall be required. 
 
viii.
 
 A thesis for the Doctoral degrees must make a significant and substantial contribution 
to knowledge. 
 
ix.
 
 A  candidate  shall  not  be  permitted  to  submit  a thesis  for  which  a  degree  has  been 
conferred in this or any other university. However, a candidate shall not be precluded 
from incorporating published work based on the thesis research.  
 
x.
 
 A paper  written  or  published  in  the  joint  names  of  two  or  more  persons  shall  not, 
normally, be accepted as a thesis. 
 

31 
 
3.28
     LAPSED THESIS 
 
xi.
 
 Where a candidate fails to complete a PhD thesis within the required period including  
extension, the thesis shall be deemed to have lapsed and cannot be submitted. 
 
xii.
 
 Such  a  candidate  may,  however,  apply  for  re-admission  to  his/her  programme.    If 
recommended by the Department for re-admission, the candidate shall be admitted for 
two years to submit a PhD thesis. 
 
3.29 EXAMINERS AND DETERMINATION OF RESULTS 
 
3.29.1 
Doctoral Thesis Supervision
 
 Faculty  members  pursuing graduate degrees  in  the  University  of  Ghana  or  other 
institutions cannot supervise other graduate students. 
 
3.29.2
 
Doctoral Thesis Examination  
i.
 
A panel comprising three (3) Examiners shall be appointed by the Academic Board on 
the  recommendation  of  the School Board  and  the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  to 
examine  a  thesis  submitted  for  a  Doctoral  degree.  The  panel  shall  consist  of  two 
External Examiners and one Internal Examiner.  
ii.
 
No supervisor shall normally be appointed as an examiner for their students’ theses. 
In  exceptional  cases,  one  supervisor  other  the  Principal  may  be  appointed  as  an 
Internal Examiner. 
iii.
 
A  doctoral  candidate  shall  not  be  examined  by  a  non-doctoral  degree  holder,  unless      
such an examiner is of professorial rank and has expertise in the candidate’s area. 
iv.
 
Where  examiners  are  appointed  from  cognate  departments  or  affiliate  institutions, 
their status shall be deemed as Internal Examiners. 
v.
 
Faculty members pursuing graduate degrees cannot examine other graduate students. 
vi.
 
All external examiners shall be of at least Senior Lecturer grade. 
 
3.29.3
 
Grading System for Thesis 
i.
 
A student’s performance in a thesis shall be graded as follows: 
Grade Mark (%)  Interpretation   
A 80  -  100  Excellent 
B+ 70  -    79  Very Good 
B 60  -    69  Good  
C 50  -    59  Referred  
D 0    -    49  Fail 
 
ii.
 
A candidate who is scored grade “A” by all examiners shall be awarded Distinction in 
the thesis. 
iii.
 
A separate report, duly signed, shall be submitted by  each  Examiner to the  Board of 
Graduate Studies in respect of a thesis. 

32 
 
iv.
 
The Examiners’ reports on a thesis shall indicate as  comprehensively  as possible 
whether  or  not  the  candidate  demonstrates  a  good  general  knowledge  of  a  particular 
field  of  learning  within  which  the  subject  of  his/her  thesis  falls;  whether  or  not  the 
presentation of the candidate’s material is satisfactory; and whether or not the thesis 
makes original and substantive contribution to the subject area of research. 
 
3.30
 
Oral Examination for Doctoral Candidates 
3.30.1  A candidate who submits a thesis for a PhD/MD/DPhil degree shall be examined 
orally and  the  oral  examination  shall  be  conducted  only  after  the  thesis  has  been 
passed.  
 
3.30.2
 
For  this  examination, a  panel  comprising  no  fewer  than  three  including,  normally, 
one Internal Examiner of the thesis and at least one External Examiner of the thesis 
shall  be  appointed  by  the  Academic  Board  on  the  recommendation  of  the School 
Board and the Board of Graduate Studies.  
 
3.30.3
 
The Chairman of this panel must be a person other than the candidate’s Supervisor 
or Examiner. 
 
3.30.4
 
In  addition  to  the  examiners,  the  panel  may  be  expanded  to  include  experts  in  the 
candidate’s field of research, as well as experts in cognate disciplines. 
   
3.30.5
 
The  Dean  of  the relevant School  or  his/her  representative  shall  chair  the  oral 
examination. 
 
3.30.6
 
The panel shall indicate in its report whether the candidate passed or failed. 
 
3.30.7
 
The  Dean  of  the  School  of  Graduate  Studies  or  his/her  representative  shall be  in 
attendance  at  all  doctoral  oral  examinations.    He/she  shall  ensure  compliance  with 
the   relevant   regulations   governing   the conduct   of   the   oral   examination 
(see 
Appendix III for the format for conducting PhD oral examinations).
 
 
 
3.30.8
 
If a candidate for the PhD/MD/DPhil degree fails to satisfy the Examiners at the oral 
examination,  the  panel  may  recommend  to  the  Board  of  Graduate  Studies  that  the 
candidate  be  permitted  to  submit  to  a  further  oral  examination  within  a period  not 
exceeding 6 months.  
 
3.30.9
 
The   results   of   the   oral   examination   shall   be   communicated   to   the   candidate 
immediately after the examination. 
3.31
 
 DETERMINATION OF DOCTORAL THESIS RESULTS
 
 
3.31.1
 
The Board of Graduate Studies shall review the recommendations of the examiners in      
            the following manner:      

33 
 
           follows: 
i.
 
Where  all  three  (3)  examiners  pass  the  thesis  and  the  oral  examination,  the  Board 
shall normally decide to pass it, subject to corrections,    
ii.
 
If  a  doctoral  thesis  is  failed  or  referred  by  one  of  the  three  (3)  examiners,  the  Board 
shall review the nature of the fail or referral grade and decide either to pass, refer or 
fail the thesis. 
iii.
 
A doctoral thesis referred by two (2) or more examiners shall be referred. 
iv.
 
A doctoral thesis failed by two or more examiners shall fail. 
v.
 
If  a  candidate  fails  to  satisfy  the  Examiners  at  a  second  oral  examination,  the  thesis 
shall fail. 
vi.
 
A plagiarized doctoral thesis shall be rejected and the candidate shall be deemed 
to have failed.
 
 
3.32  DEADLINES FOR SUBMISSION OF REVISED THESES 
 
3.32.1  A doctoral thesis passed  subject  to  correction  shall  be  submitted to  the  School  of 
Graduate Studies through the Head of Department within two (2) months. 
 
3.32.2 If  a  student  fails  to  submit a doctoral thesis  passed  subject  to  correction within  two 
months, the following sanctions shall apply: 
 
i. up to three months default:- 50 per cent of fees for extension shall be charged. 
ii. three months to six months default:- full fees for extension shall be charged. 
iii. beyond  six  months  default:- candidature  shall  be  deemed to  have lapsed  and  student 
may request for re-admission and pay appropriate fees (fees for the current academic 
year) before thesis can be submitted. 
iv. beyond one year, a student shall not be allowed to renew his/her candidature. 
 
3.32.3  If  a  thesis  submitted  for  a  doctoral  degree  is 
referred
,  the  candidate  may  be 
permitted  to  re-submit  it  in  a  revised  form  within twelve  months
.
  Where  a  thesis 
submitted for a PhD degree is referred
 
and is being resubmitted, the candidate shall 
be  required  to 
re-register 
and  pay  the  appropriate  fee(s).  The  re-submitted  thesis 
shall reflect the new date of submission.   
 
3.32.4  Where a candidate’s thesis is declared a failure,  the  candidate  may  apply  for  re-
admission to his/her programme. Such re-application shall be processed in accordance 
with  the  provisions  under 3.13.  Such  application  shall  be  referred  to  the  relevant 
Head  of  Department  for  re-admission  for  comments  and  if  recommended  by  the 
Department,  the  candidate  shall  be  re-admitted  to  repeat  the  thesis  component  of  his 
or her programme for two years.  An application made after one (1) year from date 
of failure decision shall not be approved. 
 
3.33
 ASSESSMENT OF DPHIL PUBLICATIONS 
3.33.1     A DPhil candidate shall score a minimum of sixty percent in all the assessment     

34 
 
               criteria from all three assessors to be eligible to undertake an oral examination (see  
               Appendix V for assessment criteria). 
 
3.33.2    A DPhil candidate whose publications are passed by all three assessors as in (i)     
              above, and who also passes the oral examination shall normally be declared eligible    
              for the award of the DPhil degree. 
 
3.33.3    A DPhil candidate failed by one or more assessors in any of the assessment criteria     
              shall fail. 
 
3.33.4   If a candidate is passed by all three (3) assessors but fails the oral examination,  
             he/she shall fail. 
 
3.34  DECLARATION OF RESULTS 
3.34.1  The results of the written papers of the PhD Examinations shall normally be declared 
within four (4) weeks, but not later than eight (8) weeks from the end of examinations. 
 
3.34.2  The  results  of doctoral thesis shall  normally  be  declared  when  all  the  examination 
processes are completed. 
 
3.35
 REVIEW OF WRITTEN EXAMINATION 
3.35.1   A  candidate  who  is  not  satisfied  with  the  results  of  a  University  Examination 
affecting  him/her  may  request  a  review  by  the  submission  of  an  application  to  the 
Dean  of  Graduate  Studies  through  the  Head  of  Department  and  pay  a review  fee 
which shall be three times the normal Examination Fee. 
 
3.35.2   An  application  for  a  review  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Dean  of  Graduate  Studies 
through  the  Head  of  Department  not  later  than  21  days  after  the  release  of  the  said 
results and shall state the grounds for review. 
 
3.35.3   No  action  shall  be  taken  on  an  application,  which  is  submitted  outside  the  time 
stipulated  above.    Review  shall  not  proceed  unless  the  Review  Fee  has  been  fully 
paid. 
 
3.35.4   An application entered on a candidate’s behalf by a person other than the aggrieved 
candidate himself/herself shall not be entertained. 
 
3.35.5   In the light of the review, the Board of Graduate Studies may authorize the Registrar 
to amend the results previously released as appropriate. 
3.35.6   If  it  emerges  that  a  complaint  for  review  is  frivolous  or  ill-motivated,  the  Board  of 
Graduate  Studies  may  prescribe  further  sanctions  which  may  include  barring  the 
complainant from University examinations for a stated period or an indefinite period. 
 
  

35 
 
3.36
   PUBLICATION OF RESULTS 
3.36.1 The  Head  of  Department  shall  be  required  to  publish  provisional  results  of  course 
work (in letter  grades),  with copies to the Dean  of Graduate Studies within four (4) 
weeks of the following semester. 
 
3.36.2   Results of  examinations  taken  at  the  end  of  each  Semester  shall  normally  be 
published by the Registrar during the following Semester. 
 
3.36.3   A result slip indicating the student’s performance in the examination shall be made 
available to the student by the Registrar. 
 
3.36.4 Results of graduate degree programmes shall normally be published as follows: 
 
i.   The  Date  of  Award  for  Thesis  submitted  between  1
st
 January  to 31st  July  shall  be 
July of the year of submission. 
 
ii.   The  Date  of  Award  for  Thesis  submitted  between  1st  August  and  20th  December 
shall be December of the year of submission. 
 
iii. Where  a  candidate  re-sits  a  failed  course  and  passes  it  after  submission  of  his/her 
thesis, the date of award shall not precede the date of passing written examination. 
 
3.37
 ELIGIBILITY FOR THE GRADUATE DEGREE 
 A  higher  degree  appropriately  designated  shall  be  awarded  to  a  candidate  who  has 
been properly admitted to the University, has followed the approved course of study 
over the period, and who has fulfilled both the University and School/Departmental 
requirements. 
 
3.38
 AWARD OF DEGREE 
3.38.1 A doctoral  degree  shall  not  be  conferred  on  a  candidate  unless  the  Examiners  are 
satisfied that the thesis is worthy of endorsement as a thesis approved for appropriate 
higher degree. 
 
3.38.2 The  result  of  examinations  held  in  connection  with  the  award  of doctoral  degree 
shall be laid before the Academic Board for approval. Thereafter, the degree shall be 
conferred  under  the  seal  of  the  University  upon  each  successful  candidate  at  a 
Congregation of the University assembled for the purpose. 
 
 
3.38.3   Candidates shall qualify for graduation at a congregation if they have satisfied all the 
requirements for graduation by the end of the previous academic year.  A candidate 
who could not fulfill all the requirements by the end of the previous academic  year 
but does so in the first semester of the ensuing academic year shall be eligible for the 
next graduation. 

36 
 
3.38.4   Candidates who intend to be presented at a Congregation must submit the corrected 
version  of  their  theses  for  publication not  later  than four  (4) weeks  preceding  the 
Congregation. 
 
3.39   CANCELLATION OF AWARD 
 
3.39.1   Notwithstanding  previous  confirmation  of  an  award  of  a  degree,  the  Academic 
Board may at any time cancel an award, even with retrospective effect, if it becomes 
known that: 
i.           a candidate had entered the University with false qualifications; 
ii.          a candidate had impersonated someone else; 
iii.   a  candidate  had  been  guilty  of  an  examination  malpractice  for  which  a 
Grade Z would have been awarded;  
iv.   a  candidate  has  plagiarized  material  in  his/her  thesis/dissertation.  (All 
references to other people’s work must be duly acknowledged in a student’s 
dissertation  or  thesis.  Failure  to  do  so  would  be  regarded  as  an  act  of 
plagiarism.) 
v.   that  there  are  other  reasons  that  would  have  led  to  the  withholding  of 
confirmation of the award in the first place.  
 
3.39.2   In  any  such  event,  the  decision  of  the  Academic  Board  shall  be  published  on  the 
University  Notice  Board  and  the  candidate  notified.  Such  cancellation  and  the 
reasons for it shall be entered on the candidate’s transcript.              
 
3.40 TRANSCRIPT OF ACADEMIC RECORD 
 At the end of a student’s programme, the University shall, on the  payment  of  an 
appropriate  fee,  issue  to  the  particular  student  a  complete  transcript  of  his/her 
academic  record.  This  transcript  shall record all  courses  attempted  and  all  results 
obtained. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
APPENDICES 
 
4.   APPENDIX I: FORMAT OF THESIS 
 
4.1  All  theses  must  be  prepared  according  to  both  the  University  of  Ghana  format 
requirements and School/College documentation or reference formats. School/College 
formats  must  be  deposited  with  the  School  of  Graduate  Studies.  Where  there  is 
conflict  between  Departmental  style  and  the  University  Style,  the  latter  must  be 
satisfied. Students must consult the University and School/College manuals for details. 
 
4.2  School/College Format Requirements 
Notwithstanding 4.1, School/College formats shall apply to: 
•  Chapter Structure Design 
•  Chapter Headings 
•  Reference Style 
•   Figures and Tables 
•  Chapter Content Design 
•  List of Abbreviations 
4.3 University Format Requirement shall consist of the following sections: 
•  Preliminary Information 
•  Substantive Section 
•  Bibliography and Appendices 
 
4.3.1  Preliminary Information 
i.  Title Page 
The title page shall consist of the following which should be centered (Appendix VI). 
: 
• College 
• School 
• Title of the Thesis 
• Statement of Submission 
• Name of Candidate (No Titles or Qualifications) 
• Student Number (in brackets below the name) 
• In  partial  fulfillment  of  the  Requirement  for  the  Award  of Doctor  of  Philosophy 
(not abbreviated).  
• Department/Centre/Institute 
• The date of submission (Month and Year) 
 
ii.  Declaration  
•  A candidate submitting a thesis for a Doctoral degree shall make a declaration 
to the effect that the thesis is his/her own work produced from research under 
supervision. 
 
iii.   Signature Page: The declaration page shall be signed by the following: 

38 
 
•  The Candidate 
•  Supervisors 
 
iv.  Abstract 
Every  candidate  shall  present  a  short  abstract  of  his/her  dissertation  or  thesis 
of a maximum of four (4) pages (double spaced). 
 
v.  Dedication (Optional) 
 
vi.  Acknowledgement: (1 page maximum) 
•  The   candidate   may briefly   acknowledge   those   who   made   important 
contributions to the success of his/her research and presentation of thesis. 
 
•  Where   the   thesis   has   benefited   from   a   collaborative   project   done   in 
conjunction  with  the  candidate’s  Supervisor(s),  this  should  be dully 
acknowledged. 
 
vi.  Table of Contents 
A   well   aligned   presentation   of   preliminary   information,   chapters   with 
subsections,  bibliography  and  appendices  of  the  thesis  with  relevant  page 
numbers indicated.  
 
vii.  List of Figures/Maps 
A  list  of  figures  and  maps  with  their  relevant  designated  numbering  and 
relevant pages at which they are located. 
 
viii.  List of Tables 
A list of tables with their relevant designated numbering and relevant pages at 
which they are located.  
 
ix.  List of Abbreviations 
A list of relevant abbreviations and their full rendering occurring in the thesis. 
 
4.3.2  Substantive Section 
i.  Chapter Structure 
A  thesis  must  consist  of  substantive  Chapters  including  an  introduction, 
intervening  chapters  and  a  concluding  chapter  as  determined  by  the  Faculty 
format which has been deposited with the School of Graduate Studies. 
 
ii.  Reference Style 
The reference style shall follow the School/College format. 
 
iii. Thesis Size 

39 
 
A  thesis submitted  for  a  PhD  degree shall  normally be between  50,000  to 
60,000   words excluding   bibliography,   figures,   tables,   photographs,   and 
appendices.  
 
4.3.3  Bibliography and Appendices 
i.  The  bibliography  should  be  placed  at  the  end  of  the  thesis  and  not  after  each 
chapter. 
ii.  The  order  of  arrangement  of  the  bibliography  and  appendices  should  follow 
the prescribed departmental format. 
 
iii.  The  candidate  may  submit,  as  subsidiary  matter  in  support  of  his  or  her 
candidature,  any  printed  contributions  to  the  advancement  of  his/her  subject, 
which  he  or  she  may  have published  independently  or  jointly,  or  any  other 
supporting material. In the event of a candidate presenting material from joint 
work, he or she shall be required to state fully his or her own contribution. 
 
4.4  Presentation Format 
i.  Four  typed  or  printed  copies  of  the  dissertation  or  thesis,  using  standard  A4 
paper, shall be submitted to the School of Graduate Studies through the Head 
of Department for examination.  
 
ii.  Typed thesis should be on only one side of the paper. 
 
iii.  Margins: When bound all margins of the thesis should be 2.54 cm (1 inch). 
 
iv.  Font Type & Size: Theses should be typed in New Times Roman Font Size 12. 
 
v.  Chapter headings should be in New Times Roman Font Size 14 Bold. 
 
vi.  Font  sizes  for  indented  citations,  graphs,  figures  and  tables  should  not  be 
lower New Times Roman font size 10. 
 
vii.  Page  Numbers:  Page  numbers  should  be  centred  at  the  bottom  of  page 
throughout the thesis.  
 
viii.  The preliminary pages should be numbered with Roman numerals. 
 
ix.  Page numbering in Arabic numerals should run through the entire thesis. 
 
  

40 
 
4.5  Binding 
 
4.5.1  Examination Copy 
A thesis submitted for examination should be bound in soft manila card cover (green 
or  light  blue). The front cover  shall bear  the details  prescribed  in  4.3.1  (i)  and 
Appendix VI. 
 
4.5.2  Final Copy 
After the thesis has been approved, it must be bound in standard form Art vellum or 
cloth;  overcast;  edges  uncut.  The  four  (4)  final  copies  of  a  thesis that  has been 
accepted for the award of a Doctoral degree shall be distributed as follows: 
 
 Two (2) copies shall be sent to the School of Graduate Studies, one of which 
shall be deposited in the Balme Library and the other kept by the School;  
 
 The remaining two (2) copies shall be retained by the candidate’s Head of 
Department,  one  of  which  shall  be  kept  in  the  Departmental  Library  and  the 
other given to the candidate. 
 
 
 
4.5.3  Labeling of Final Copy 
i.  Front Cover 
The  front  cover  of  the  final  copy  should  be  lettered  boldly  in  gold  (0.5.-
1.25cm) with the Title, Author and Date (Month and Year). 
 
ii.  Spine 
The  spine  of  the  thesis  should  be  lettered  boldly  up  back  in  gold  (0.5  to 
1.25cm)  with  the  degree,  year, and name,  before  the  award  of  the  Degree  is 
published by the Registrar. 
 
4.5.4  Binding Colour 
The colour scheme for a PhD Thesis shall be Dark Blue. 
 
4.6  PDF Version 
A  PDF  version  of  the  final  thesis  should  be  submitted  with  the  hardcopies  to  the 
School of Graduate Studies. 
 
4.7  Soft Copy of Abstract 
A soft copy of the abstract of the thesis should be separately submitted. In addition to 
the  details  in  the  thesis,  this  copy  should  bear  the  thesis  title,  the  name  of  the 
candidate and the names of supervisors. 
 
 

41 
 
APPENDIX II:  
 
5.   UNIVERSITY EXAMINATIONS INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES 
(Extracts from Regulations Governing University Examinations) 
 
5.1  A candidate for a University Examination must have followed the approved course as 
a   regular   student   over   the   required   period,   and   must   have   registered   for   the 
examination. 
 
5.2  Entry to the Examination shall be by registration on a form on which the papers to be 
written  shall  be  indicated  by  the  title.  The  Registration  Form  duly  endorsed  by  the 
Head(s)  of  Department  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Academic  Affairs  Directorate  not 
later than six weeks before the commencement of the Semester Examination. 
 
5.3  A candidate shall not be admitted to a University Examination if  
 
i.  he has not been entered for it as stated in 5.2. 
 
ii.  the subject of the Examination has merely been audited unless the course had 
been followed previously; 
iii.  he owes fees to the University/Hall; 
iv.  is under suspension or has been dismissed from the University. 
 
5.4  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  candidate  to  consult  the  daily  time-table  (to  be  made 
available  at  least  24  hours  ahead  of  time)  to  ascertain  the  papers  to  be  written  each 
day and to make himself available at the appointed place at least one-half hour before 
the examination. 
 
5.5  A candidate may be refused admission to a University  Examination if he/she reports 
to the Examination more than half an hour after its commencement. 
 
5.6  It  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  the  candidate  to  provide  for  himself/herself  a  pen, 
pencil and an eraser as needed. It is also his/her responsibility to ensure that he/she is 
given the right question paper and other material needed for the examination. 
 
5.7  An  examination  candidate  shall  not  bring  to  the  Examination  Centre  or  to  the 
washroom of the Examination Centre or in the immediate vicinity of the Examination 
Centre  any  book,  paper  or  written  information  or Cellular/Mobile  phones  or  other 
unauthorized material. Any such material shall not be deposited at the entrance to the 
Examination Room or the Washroom or in the immediate vicinity of the Examination 
Centre. No student shall enter the Examination Room until he/she is invited or called 
and/or requested to enter the Examination Room. 
 

42 
 
i.  Any  candidate who is seen with lecture notes or  books or Cellular/Mobile phones or 
any  unauthorised  material  in  the  Examination  Centre  or  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
the  Examination  Centre  before  the  commencement  of  the  examination  shall  be 
deemed to have committed an offence, and shall be banned from the examination and 
awarded a grade X. 
 
ii.  A   candidate   shall   uphold   the   highest   standard   of   civility   and   courtesy   in   an 
examination centre. A candidate who flouts the instruction(s) of a Chief Invigilator or 
Invigilator or misconducts himself/herself in any manner to an examination official at 
an  examination  centre  commits  an  offence.  Such  candidate  shall  be  banned  from  the 
examination and awarded a grade X. 
 
iii.  A candidate who is suspected of hiding unauthorised material on him/her person may 
be  asked  by  the  invigilator  to  submit  to  a  body  search.  Refusal  to  submit  to  a  body 
search  is  tantamount  to  misconduct.  iv  An  examination  candidate  shall,  for  the 
purpose of identification by the Chief Invigilator/Invigilator, carry on him/her his/her 
student  identity  card  on  the  examination  table  to  enable  the  invigilator  ascertain  the 
identity of the person writing the examination. The Chief Invigilator shall reserve the 
right to refuse any candidate without an identity card entry to the Examination. 
 
5.8  No communication between candidates is permitted in the examination hall.  
 
i.  A candidate shall not pass or attempt to pass any information or instrument from one 
to another during an examination; 
 
ii  A  candidate  shall  not  copy  or  attempt  to  copy  from  another  candidate  or  engage  in 
any similar activity. 
 
iii.  A candidate shall not disturb or distract any other candidate during an examination; 
 
iv.  Candidates may attract the attention of the Invigilator by raising their hands. 
 
5.9  Smoking or drinking of alcoholic beverages is not allowed in the Examination Room. 
 
5.10  Candidates  may  leave  the  examination  room  temporarily,  and  only  with  the  express 
permission  of  the  Invigilator.  In  such  cases  the  invigilator  will  be  required  to  satisfy 
himself that a candidate does not carry on his/her person any unauthorized material. A 
candidate  who  is  allowed  to  leave  the  Examination  Room  temporarily  will  be 
accompanied  while  outside  the  examination  room  by  an  attendant  designated  by  the 
Invigilator. 
 
5.11  A  candidate  who  finishes  an  examination  ahead  of  time  may  leave  the  Examination 
Room after surrendering his/her answer books. The candidate shall not be allowed to 
return to the Examination Room. 

43 
 
5.12  At the end of each examination, candidates should ensure that they do not take away 
any answer books, whether used or unused, from the Hall. 
 
5.13  Candidates should not in any way interfere with the stapling in the answer books. Any 
complaints  about  the  answer  books  should  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the 
Invigilator. 
 
5.14  A candidate who fails to present himself at an examination without satisfactory reason 
shall  be  awarded  a  grade  X.  The award  of  grade  X  in  a  required  paper  shall  mean 
failure  not  just  in  that  paper  but  in  the  examination  as  a  whole.  The  following  shall 
not normally be  accepted as reasons  for being  absent from any paper  at a University 
Examination: 
 
i.  mis-reading the examination time-table; 
ii.  forgetting the date or time of examination; 
iii.  inability to locate the examination hall; 
iv.  inability to rouse oneself from sleep in time for the examination; 
v.  failure to find transport; 
vi.  loss of a relation; 
vii.  pregnancy. 
 
5.15  A  breach  of  any  of  the  foregoing  regulations  made  for  the  conduct  of  University 
Examinations may attract one or more of the following sanctions: 
i.  a reprimand; 
ii.  loss of marks; 
iii.  cancellation  of  a  paper  (in  which  case  zero  shall  be  substituted  for  the  mark 
earned); 
iv.  withholding of results for a period; 
v.  award of grade X. 
In  each  case  of  a  breach  the  particulars  and  the  sanction  shall  be  entered  on  the 
student’s transcript of academic record. 
 
5.16  Further  to  1.15,  a  grade  Z  leading  to  failure  in  a  University  Examination,  shall  be 
awarded  wherever  it  is  established  that  a  candidate  had  attempted  to  gain  an  unfair 
advantage in an examination be it in a Principal Subject or an Ancillary or any other 
paper. Further sanctions may include: 
 
i.  being barred from a University Examination for a stated period; 
ii.  being barred from a University Examination indefinitely; 
iii.  suspension from the University; 
iv.  expulsion from the University. 
 
5.17  Results of University Examinations shall be posted on the University Notice Board. It 
shall be the responsibility of the candidate to consult the University Notice Board for 

44 
 
the result of any examination taken. Alternatively he/she may write to the Director of 
Academic Affairs to enquire about his/her results or request details of such results for 
which purpose he may provide a stamped addressed envelope. 
 
5.18  A candidate who is not satisfied with the results of a University Examination affecting 
him/her  may  request  a  review  by  submission  of an  application  to  the  Registrar  and 
payment  of  a  review  fee  which  shall  be  determined  at  not  less  than  three  times  the 
normal Examination Fee. 
 
5.19  An application  for  a review shall be submitted to the Registrar not later than 21days 
after release of the said results and shall state the grounds for review. 
 
5.20  An application entered on a candidate’s behalf by a person other than the aggrieved 
candidate himself shall not be entertained. 
 
5.21  No  action  shall  be  taken  on  an  application  which  is  submitted  outside  the  time 
stipulated in 5.19. Review shall not proceed unless the Review Fee is fully paid. 
 
5.22  The Board of Examiners may authorize the Registrar to amend the results as released 
in the light of the review. 
 
5.23  If  it  emerges  that  a  complaint  is  frivolous  or  ill-motivated,  the  Board  may  prescribe 
further sanctions which may include barring the complainant from taking a University 
Examination for a stated period or an indefinite period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
APPENDIX III: 
 
6.   UNIVERSITY EXAMINATIONS: 
EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE OR OFFENCE 
 
6.1.  Examination  offences  shall  be  understood  to  include  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  a 
candidate to gain an unfair advantage, and any breach of the Examination Regulations 
and  Instructions  to  candidates  including  refusal  on  the  part  of  a  candidate  to  occupy 
an assigned place in an Examination Room, any form of communication with another 
candidate,  possession  of  a  book,  paper  or  written  information  of  any  kind  except  as 
required  by  the  rules  of  a  particular  examination,  smoking,  leaving  an  Examination 
Room without permission of the Invigilator, or refusal to follow instructions. 
 
6.2.  The  Chief  Invigilator  or  any  examiner  shall  report  to  the  Registrar  as  soon  as 
practicable  any  instance  of  a  breach  of  Examination  Regulations.  In  respect  of 
offences  occurring  outside  the  precincts  of  an  Examination  Room,  the  Dean  shall 
cause an enquiry to be made into any reports that reach him and submit his findings to 
the Registrar. 
 
6.3.  The  Board  of  Examiners  shall  review  all  reports  received  in  connection  with  an 
examination  malpractice  or  an  offence.  On  the  basis  of  its  review,  the  Board  of 
Examiners  may  impose  a  sanction  involving  loss  of  marks  in  a  particular  paper.  A 
grade Z shall be awarded whenever it is established that a candidate had attempted to 
gain an unfair advantage in an examination be it in a Principal Subject or an Ancillary 
or any other paper or has misconducted himself or herself in an examination. Such a 
candidate may be debarred from taking a University Examination for a stated period 
or indefinitely or expelled from the University. 
 
6.4.  In all instances of examination malpractices or offences a formal report shall be made 
to  the  Academic  Board  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  Academic  Board  may  review  all 
such reported cases and may vary the sanctions as it thinks fit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
APPENDIX IV: 
 
7.   FORMAT FOR CONDUCTING DOCTORAL ORAL EXAMINATIONS 
 
7.1   Introduction of Chairperson  
7.2   Chairperson introduces candidate, panel of examiners, candidate’s supervisors, and 
other guests. 
7.3   Dean of Graduate Studies or his/her representative presents the regulations and 
procedures concerning PhD Oral Examinations 
7.4   Chairperson invites candidate to make his oral presentation 
7.5   Presentation by the Candidate (not more than 40 minutes) 
7.6   Questions/Critiques/Comments by: 
 External Examiner(s) 
 Internal Examiner 
 Non-examiners 
Candidate responds to issues raised preferably one at a time. 
7.7     Examiners  retire  from  venue  to  determine  result  of oral  examination  (non-examiners    
to remain at venue for announcement of panel’s recommendation) 
7.8     Examiners determine candidate’s performance in the oral exam only ‘in camera’ and   
return to venue for announcement of their recommendation. 
7.9    Chairman announces panel’s recommendation to candidate and audience. 
7.10 Remarks by Candidate (optional) 
7.11 Remarks by the Dean of Graduate Studies 
7.12 Chairperson dissolves oral examination session. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
APPENDIX V: 
8.  CRITERIA FOR EXAMINATION OF PUBLICATIONS SUBMITTED FOR D.PHIL DEGREE 
Only graduates  of  the  University  of  Ghana  shall  be  eligible  for  the  award  of  the  D.Phil  degree.  
Applicants  must  hold  a  Masters  degree  by  research  (equivalent  to  the  M.Phil  degree  of  the 
University of Ghana) awarded not less than ten years at the time of application.  Applicants may 
submit   published   works   of   academic  merit   on  a   theme   or   specific   area   of   research   for 
consideration  for  the  award  of  D.Phil  degrees.    In  addition  to  the  published  works,  candidates 
shall be required to submit a synthesis cover paper that highlights the key research findings and 
major contributions to knowledge on the selected theme or field of research.  Published works 
should be based on a common and coherent theme and demonstrate scholarship on the theme. 
The following are the criteria to guide examiners of D.Phil applications: 
i. The degree shall be awarded in consideration of published works of academic merit, the 
standard of which shall not be below that of a Ph.D. 
ii. Published  works submitted  must  be  based  on  original  research  and may  not  be  review 
articles or essays drawing together other people’s works. 
iii. For the purpose of a D.Phil award, only published works comprising the following shall 
be considered: 
a) articles published in peer reviewed journals;  
b) books published by a recognized academic publisher; and 
c) creative  works  (novels,  poetry,  drama  and  music  composition)  published  by  a 
recognized publisher  
iv. Sole  authored  and  relevant  published  works  shall  carry  more  weighting  than  joint 
authored  ones.    Where  joint  authored  works  are  submitted,  the  applicant  would  be 
required to indicate their contribution. 
v. Examiners are expected to comment as copiously as possible on each publication before 
assigning scores as provided in (vii). 
  

48 
 
vi. The maximum scores to be awarded shall be as follows:  
 Criteria for scoring Maximum 
points 
Candidate’s 
score 
1 Academic quality of published works to be scored as 
follows: 
 max.3 marks for each sole authored article/ 
published work; 
 max.2 marks for joint authorships where 
applicant is the lead author; 
 max.1 mark for joint authorships where 
applicant is not the lead author. 
                                   Total score for 1 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
 
2 Originality of research work 20  
3 Contribution to knowledge in candidate’s chosen 
theme/research area 
15  
4 Presentation 5  
 Total Score 100  
 
vii. A  candidate  shall  be  required  to  score  a  minimum  of  60%  under  each  criterion 
and  a  total  of  at  least  60%  by  each  of  the  four  assessors  and  pass  an  oral 
examination  as  detailed  in  the  Handbook  for  Graduate  Studies,  Vol.1  to  be 
considered for the award. 
  

49 
 
APPENDIX VI: 
 
9. SAMPLE TITLE PAGE FOR PH.D THESIS 
 
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA 
 
COLLEGE OF HUMANITIES 
 
 
 
 SERIAL VERB NOMINALIZATION IN DAGBANI 
 
 
 
 
BY 
 
KWASI ASIMESI 
(NB: NO MENTION OF TITLES OR PREVIOUS DEGREES) 
 
(ID. NO. 1012131415) 
 
 
 
 
 
A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES IN PARTIAL 
FULFILMENT OF THE AWARD OF DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN 
LINGUISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LINGUISTICS 
 
JULY 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
APPENDIX VII: 
 
 
10. SAMPLE COVER PAGE FOR PH.D THESIS 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA 
COLLEGE OF HUMANITIES 
 
 
  
SERIAL VERB NOMINALIZATION IN DAGBANI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KWASI ASIMESI 
(NO MENTION OF TITLES OR PREVIOUS DEGREES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LINGUISTICS 
 
JULY 2014