1 
 
GUIDELINES TO STUDENTS ON NEW THESIS SUBMISSION AND 
TRACKING SYSTEM 
1. ACCESSING THE SYSTEM 
To access the system, type the following URL in any standard web browser: 
https://academic.ug.edu.gh/ugtracker 
The login screen will look like the image below: 
 
2. Log in with student ID number and PIN. 
 
3. Click on ‘Thesis/Dissertation title’ under the drop-down menu on the left-hand side of the 
screen.  
 
 

 
2 
 
4. Copy and paste the approved dissertation/thesis title in the ‘Dissertation/Thesis Title’ 
field. 
 
 
5. Select the option of either Dissertation or Thesis under the ‘Title’ section. 
 
 

 
3 
 
6. Select ‘Dissertation/Thesis’ code. 
 
7. Click on ‘Save’ to proceed to upload documents. 
 

 
4 
 
8. Click on ‘Attachment’ to upload documents. Documents must be uploaded in the 
following order: Thesis→Turnitin report→Clearance form→’Other’. The first three 
documents are compulsory uploads. 
 
9. To upload the documents, follow the steps below: 
i. Click on ‘Type’ 
 

 
5 
 
 
ii. Select ‘Thesis/Dissertation’ 
 
 
iii. Click on ‘Choose file’ 
 

 
6 
 
iv. Proceed to select your thesis/dissertation document from your storage location. 
v. Click on ‘Upload’ 
 
vi. Click the ‘OK’ button on the pop-up message at the top of the screen then click 
on the ‘Return’ button.  
 

 
7 
 
vii. Repeat the steps to upload the remaining documents i.e. Turnitin report, 
Financial clearance form and ‘other’ documents (if required). 
Note: To upload other documents, in the ‘File Description’ box, type the name 
of the document e.g. Extension Letter, as seen in the example below. 
 
10.  Once all documents have been uploaded, click on ‘Return’ and then click on the 
‘Submit’ button. 
 

 
8 
 
11. Click the ‘OK’ button on the pop-up message at the top of the screen to proceed to the 
confirmation page. 
 
 
12.  Confirmation page includes date of submission of thesis/dissertation and is proof of 
submission. Save and/or print the confirmation page for your records. 
13. To obtain the printout of your submission follow the steps below: 
i.  Click on ‘Proof of Submission’ under the drop-down menu on the left-hand side of 
the screen. 

 
9 
 
 
 
ii.  Click on ‘Export Proof of Submission’ as shown below to get your proof in a pdf file which 
you can print or save and use as a proof of submission. 
 

 
10 
 
iii.  To complete the process, log out of the system by clicking on the ‘logout’ button as shown in the image 
below. 
 
iv. If you upload the wrong document by mistake, select the item you want to remove by clicking on the check 
box in front of the item to remove and proceed to click on the ‘Delete’ button as shown in the images below.  
 
 

 
11 
 
 
 
Once the document has been deleted you may continue to upload the right item.  
Ensure that all documents uploaded are the correct documents required. Any submissions containing 
wrong documents will be returned.