Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
Sections 
P
ART I—ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BOARD  
 1.    Public Procurement Board 
 2.    Object of the Board 
 3.    Functions of the Board 
 4.    Membership of the Board 
 5.    Term of office 
 6.    Meetings of the Board 
 7.    Committees of the Board 
 8.    Secretariat of the Board 
 9.    Chief Executive of the Board 
10.   Expenses of the Board 
11.   Accounts and audit 
12.   Financial year of the Board 
13.   Annual   report   
 
P
ART II—PROCUREMENT STRUCTURES 
14.   Scope of application 
15.   Procurement   entity   
16.   Declaration   of   procurement entity 
17.   Tender   Committee   
18.   Meetings of Tender Committees 
19.   Tender evaluation panel 
20.   Tender Review Boards 
P
ART III—PROCUREMENT RULES 
21.   Procurement   plan   
22.   Qualification of tenderers 
23.   Prequalification   proceedings   
24.   Decision   on   prequalification   
25.   Participation by suppliers, contractors or consultants on nationality basis 
26.   Form of communication 
27.   Documentary evidence in procurement proceedings 
28.   Record of procurement proceedings 
29.   Rejection of tenders, proposals and quotations 
Section 
30.   Entry into force of the procurement contract 
31.   Public notice of procurement contract awards 
32.   Inducements from suppliers, contractors and consultants 
33.   Description of goods, works or services 
34.   Language   

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
P
ART IV—METHODS OF PROCUREMENT 
35.   Competitive   tendering   
36.   Two-stage   tendering   
37.   Procedures for two-stage tendering 
38.   Restricted   tendering   
39.    Procedure for restricted tendering 
40.   Single-source   procurement   
41.   Procedure for single-source procurement 
42.   Request for quotations 
43.   Procedure for request for quotation  
P
ART V—TENDERING PROCEDURES 
Sub-Part I – Invitation of tenders and applications to prequalify 
44.   National   competitive   tendering   
45.   International competitive tendering 
46.   Other international procedures 
47.   Procedures for inviting tenders or applications to prequalify 
48.   Contents of invitation to tender and invitation to prequalify 
49.   Provision of tender documents 
50.   Contents of tender documents and use of standard tender documents 
51.   Clarifications and modifications of tender documents 
 
Sub-Part II—Submission of Tenders 
52.    Language of tenders 
53.   Submission of tenders 
54.   Period of validity of tenders; modification and withdrawal of tenders 
55.   Tender   securities   
Sub-Part III—Evaluation and Comparison of Tenders 
56. Opening of tenders 
57. Examination of tenders 
Section 
58.   Responsiveness of tenders 
59.   Evaluation of tenders 
60.   Margin of preference 
61.   Multiple currency tender prices 
62.   Repeat tender qualifications 
63.   Non-disclosure of tender evaluation details 
64.   Prohibition of negotiations with suppliers or contractors 
65.   Acceptance of tender and entry into force of procurement contract 
P
ART VI—METHODS AND PROCEDURES TO ENGAGE THE SERVICES 
OF 
CONSULTANTS 
66.   Notice of invitation of expressions of interest and preparation of shortlists 
67.   Shortlisted   candidates   
68.   Content of requests for proposals for consultancy services 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
69.   Criteria for the evaluation of proposals 
70.   Clarification and modification of requests for proposals 
71.   Choice of selection procedure 
72.   Conditions for use of other methods of selection of consultants 
73.   Receipt of proposals 
74.   Evaluation of proposals 
75.   Selection procedure where price is a factor 
76.   Selection procedure where price is not a factor 
77.   Confidentiality   
P
ART VII—REVIEW 
78.   Right to review 
79.   Review by procurement entity 
80.   Administrative   review   
81.   Certain   rules   applicable   to review proceedings  
82.   Suspension of procurement proceedings 
P
ART VIII—DISPOSAL OF STORES, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
83.   Authority   to   dispose   
84.   Disposal   procedures   
P
ART IX—MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
85.   Instructions and guidelines for disposal of unserviceable stores 
86.   Code of conduct 
Section 
87.   Modifications   
88.   Request for information by the Board 
89.   Investigation by the Board 
90.   Procedures on completion of investigation 
91.   Statutory   audits   
92.   Offences relating to procurement 
93.   Corrupt   practices   
94.   Review of threshold levels 
95.   Public access to legal texts 
96.   International   obligations   
97.   Regulations   
98.   Interpretation   
99.   Repeal   and   Savings   
 
Schedules 
 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
 
THE SIX HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THIRD 
ACT 
OF THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF GHANA 
ENTITLED 
THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT ACT, 2003 
AN  ACT  to  provide  for  public  procurement,  establish  the  Public  Procurement  Board;  
make  administrative  and  institutional  arrangements  for  procurement;  stipulate  tendering  
procedures and provide for purposes connected with these. 
DATE OF ASSENT: 31st December, 2003. 
BE IT ENACTED by Parliament as follows: 
PART I—ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT BOARD  
Public Procurement Board 
1. (1)  There  is  established  by  this  Act  a  body  to  be  known  as  the  Public  Procurement  
Board, referred to in this Act as “the Board”. 
(2)  The  Board  shall  be  a  body  corporate  with  perpetual  succession  and  a  common  
seal and may sue and be sued in its corporate name. 
(3) The Board may acquire, hold, manage or dispose of any movable or immovable 
property  in  connection  with  the  discharge  of  its  functions  and  may  enter  into  contracts  
and transactions that are reasonably related to its functions. 
Object of the Board  
2. The object of the Board is to harmonise the processes of public procurement in the 
public  service  to  secure  a  judicious,  economic  and  efficient  use  of  state  resources  in  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
public procurement and ensure that public procurement is carried out in a fair, transparent 
and non-discriminatory manner. 
Functions of the Board 
3. In furtherance of its object the Board shall perform the following functions: 
(a)  make proposals for the formulation of policies on procurement; 
(b)  ensure  policy  implementation  and  human  resource  development  for  public  
procurement; 
(c)  develop  draft  rules,  instructions,  other  regulatory  documentation  on  public  
procurement and formats for public procurement documentation; 
(d)  monitor  and  supervise  public  procurement  and  ensure  compliance  with  
statutory requirements; 
(e)  have  the  right  to  obtain  information  concerning  public  procurement  from  
contracting authorities; 
(f)   establish   and   implement   an   information   system   relating   to   public   
procurement; 
(g)   publish   a   monthly   Public   Procurement   Bulletin   which   shall   contain   
information    germane    to    public    procurement,    including    proposed    
procurement  notices,  notices  of  invitation  to  tender  and  contract  award  
information; 
(h)  assess  the  operations  of  the  public  procurement  processes  and  submit  
proposals for improvement of the processes; 
(i)  present annual reports to the Minister on the public procurement processes; 
(j)   facilitate  the  training  of  public  officials  involved  in  public  procurement  at  
various levels; 
(k)  develop,  promote  and  support  training  and  professional  development  of  
persons  engaged  in  public  procurement,  and  ensure  adherence  by  the  
trained persons to ethical standards; 
(l)  advise Government on issues relating to public procurement; 
(m) organise and participate in the administrative review procedures in Part VII 
of this Act; 
(n)  plan and co-ordinate technical assistance in the field of public procurement; 
(o) maintain a register of procurement entities and members of and secretaries 
to tender committees of public procurement entities; 
(p) maintain a data base of suppliers, contractors and consultants and a record 
of prices to assist in the work of procurement entities;  
(q)  investigate  and  debar  from  procurement  practice  under  this  Act,  suppliers,  
contractors  and  consultants  who  have  seriously  neglected  their  obligations  
under a public procurement contract, have provided false information about 
their qualifications, or offered inducements of the kind referred to in section 
32 of this Act; 
(r)  maintain a list of firms that have been debarred from participating in public 
procurement and communicate the list to procurement entities on a regular 
basis; 
(s)  hold  an  annual  forum  for  consultations  on  public  procurement  and  other  
related issues; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(t)   assist  the  local  business  community  to  become  competitive  and  efficient  
suppliers to the public sector; and 
(u)  perform  such  other  functions  as  are  incidental  to  the  attainment  of  the  
objects of this Act. 
Membership of the Board 
4. (1) The Board comprises 
(a)  a  chairperson,  who  shall  be  a  person  competent  and  experienced  in  public  
procurement; 
(b)  a  vice-chairperson,  who  shall  be  elected  by  members  from  among  their  
number; 
(c)  four  persons  from  the  public  sector  made  up  of  a  representative  of  the  
Attorney  General  and  three  other  persons,  nominated  by  the  Minister,  one  
of  whom  is  a  woman  and  each  of  whom  shall  have  experience  in  public  
procurement  and  be  familiar  with  governmental  and  multi-lateral  agency  
procurement procedures; 
(d)  three  persons  from  the  private  sector  who  have  experience  in  procurement  
at least one of whom is a woman; 
(e)  the Chief Executive of the Board. 
(2)  The  members  of  the  Board  shall  be  appointed  by  the  President  acting  in  
consultation with the Council of State. 
Term of office 
5. (1) A member of the Board other than the Chief Executive, 
(a) shall hold office for a term of four years and is eligible for re-appointment 
for another term only; 
(b) may in writing addressed to the President through the Minister resign from 
office. 
(2) A member may be removed from office by the President acting in consultation 
with the Council of State for inability to perform the functions of office, infirmity or any 
sufficient cause. 
(3) Members shall be paid allowances determined by the Minister. 
Meetings of the Board 
6. (1) The Board shall meet for the despatch of business at such times and places as the 
Chairperson may determine but shall meet at least once every three months. 
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at meetings of the Board and in the absence of the 
Chairperson the Vice-Chairperson shall preside and in the absence of both, the members 
shall elect one of their number to preside. 
(3)  The  quorum  for  a  meeting  of  the  Board  shall  be  five  including  the  Chief  
Executive. 
(4)  The  Board  may  co-opt  any  person  to  act  as  adviser  at  a  meeting  of  the  Board,  
except  that  a  co-opted  person  does  not  have  the  right  to  vote  on  any  matter  before  the  
Board for decision. 
(5) The validity of the proceedings of the Board shall not be affected by a vacancy 
among its members or by a defect in the appointment or qualification of a member. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(6)   Except   as   otherwise   expressly   provided,   the   Board   shall   determine   the   
procedure for its meetings.  
Committees of the Board 
7. The  Board  may  for  the  discharge  of  its  functions  appoint  committees  of  the  Board  
comprising members of the Board or non-members or both and may assign to them such 
functions as the Board may determine except that a committee composed entirely of non-
members may only advise the Board. 
Secretariat of the Board 
8. (1) The Board shall have a Secretariat with such divisions and structures determined 
by the Board as may be necessary for the effective execution of its functions. 
(2)  The  Board  shall  have  an  officer  to  be  designated  the  Secretary  who  shall  
perform  the  function  of  keeping  accurate  records  of  proceedings  and  decisions  of  the  
Board and such other functions as the Chief Executive may direct. 
(3)  The  Board  may  engage  such  consultants  and  advisers  as  it  may  require  for  the  
proper and efficient discharge of the functions of the Secretariat. 
Chief Executive of the Board 
9. (1)  The  Chief  Executive  of  the  Board  shall  be  appointed  in  accordance  with  article  
195 of the Constitution. 
(2) The Chief Executive shall hold office on such terms and conditions as may be in 
the letter of appointment to office. 
(3) Subject to such general directions as the Board may give, the Chief Executive is 
responsible  for  the  day-to-day  administration  of  the  Secretariat  of  the  Board  and  the  
implementation of the decisions of the Board. 
(4) The Chief Executive may delegate functions of the office as Chief Executive to 
any officer of the Secretariat but shall not be relieved of the ultimate responsibility for the 
discharge of the delegated function. 
Expenses of the Board 
10. Parliament shall provide the Board with such monies as it may require to meet its 
expenditure.  The  Board  may  also  receive  monies  from  other  sources  approved  by  the  
Minister. 
Accounts and audit 
11. (1)  The  Board  shall  keep  books  of  account  and  proper  records  in  relation  to  them  
and  the  accounts  books  and  records  of  the  Board  shall  be  in  a  form  prescribed  by  the  
Controller and Accountant-General and approved by the Auditor-General. 
(2) The books and accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by the Auditor-
General or by an auditor appointed by the Auditor-General. 
Financial year of Board 
12. The  financial  year  of  the  Board  shall  be  the  same  as  the  financial  year  of  the  
Government. 
Annual report 
13. (1)  The  Board  shall  within  three  months  after  the  end  of  each  year,  submit  to  the  
Minister a written report indicating the activities and operations of the Board in respect of 
the preceding year. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(2)  The  annual  report  shall  include  a  copy  of  the  audited  accounts  together  with  
the Auditor-General’s report and the Minister shall as soon as practicable after receipt of 
the  annual  report  submit  the  report  to  Parliament  with  such  comment  as  the  Minister  
considers necessary. 
P
ART II—PROCUREMENT STRUCTURES 
Scope of application 
14. (1) This Act applies to 
(a) the procurement of goods, works and services, financed in whole or in part 
from  public  funds  except  where  the  Minister  decides  that  it  is  in  the  
national interest to use a different procedure; 
(b)   functions   that   pertain   to   procurement   of   goods,   works   and   services   
including   the   description   of   requirements   and   invitation   of   sources,   
preparation,  selection  and  award  of  contract  and  the  phases  of  contract  
administration; 
(c)  the disposal of public stores and equipment; and 
(d)  procurement  with  funds  or  loans  taken  or  guaranteed  by  the  State  and  
foreign  aid  funds  except  where  the  applicable  loan  agreement,  guarantee  
contract  or  foreign  agreement  provides  the  procedure  for  the  use  of  the  
funds. 
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), this Act applies to 
(a)  central management agencies; 
(b)  government ministries,  departments and agencies; 
(c)  subvented  agencies;  
(d)  governance  institutions;  
(e)  state owned enterprises to the extent that they utilise public funds; 
(f)  public universities, public schools, colleges and hospitals; 
(g)  the  Bank  of  Ghana  and  financial  institutions  such  as  public  trusts,  pension  
funds, insurance companies and building societies which are wholly owned 
by the State or in which the State has majority interest; 
(h) institutions established by Government for the general welfare of the public 
or community. 
(3)  Where  the  Minister  decides  under  subsection  (1)(a)  that  it  is  in  the  national  
interest to use a different procedure, the Minister shall define and publish in the Gazette 
the method of procurement to be followed in order to serve the interest of economy. 
Procurement entity 
15. (1) A procurement entity is responsible for procurement, subject to this Act and to 
such   other   conditions   as   may   be   laid   down   in   the   procurement   regulations   and   
administrative instructions of the Minister, issued in consultation with the Board. 
(2)  The  head  of  an  entity  and  any  officer  to  whom  responsibility  is  delegated  are  
responsible  and  accountable  for  action  taken  and  for  any  instructions  with  regard  to  the  
implementation of this Act that may be issued by the Minister acting in consultation with 
the Board. 
(3)  Procurement  decisions  of  an  entity  shall  be  taken  in  a  corporate  manner  and  
any internal units concerned shall contribute to the decision making process.  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(4)  The  head  of  an  entity  is  responsible  to  ensure  that  provisions  of  this  Act  are  
complied  with;  and  concurrent  approval  by  any  Tender  Review  Board  shall  not  absolve  
the head of entity from accountability for a contract that may be determined to have been 
procured in a manner that is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 
Declaration of procurement entity 
16. (1)  The  Minister  may,  in  consultation  with  the  Board,  by  notice  in  the  Gazette, 
declare any entity or person to be a procurement entity. 
(2)  Subject  to  approval  by  the  Board,  a  procurement  entity  may  undertake  
procurement in accordance with established private sector or commercial practices if  
(a)  the  procurement  entity  is  legally  and  financially  autonomous  and  operates  
under commercial law; 
(b)  it  is  beyond  contention  that  public  sector  procurement  procedures  are  not  
suitable, considering the strategic nature of the procurement; and 
(c)  the  proposed  procurement  method  will  ensure  value  for  money,  provide  
competition and transparency to the extent possible. 
Tender Committee 
17. (1) Each procurement entity shall establish a Tender Committee in the manner set 
out in Schedule 1. 
(2) In the performance of its functions, a Tender Committee shall 
(a)   ensure   that   at   every   stage   of   the   procurement   activity,   procedures   
prescribed in this Act have been followed; 
(b)  exercise sound judgment in making procurement decisions; and 
(c)   refer   to   the   appropriate   Tender   Review   Board   for   approval,   any   
procurement above its approval threshold, taking into consideration the fact 
that approval above the Entity Committee is a one stop only approval. 
Meetings of Tender Committee 
18.  The  Tender  Committee  shall  meet  at  least  once  every  quarter  and  notice  of  the  
meetings shall be given at least two weeks prior to the scheduled date of the meeting. 
Tender evaluation panel 
19. (1)  Each  procurement  entity  shall  appoint  a  tender  evaluation  panel  with  the  
required expertise to evaluate tenders and assist the Tender Committee in its work.  
(2)  In  the  performance  of  its  functions,  a  tender  evaluation  panel  shall  proceed  
according to the predetermined and published evaluation criteria.     
Tender Review Boards 
20. (1)  There  shall  be  established  at  each  level  of  public  procurement  the  following  
Tender Review Boards in the manner set out in Schedule 2 
(a)  Central Tender Review Board; 
(b)  Ministerial/Headquarters Tender Review Boards; 
(c)  Regional Tender Review Boards; 
(d)  District Tender Review Boards. 
(2) A Tender Review Board shall perform the following functions: 
(a)  in  relation  to  the  particular  procurement  under  consideration,  review  the  
activities  at  each  step  of  the  procurement  cycle  leading  to  the  selection  of  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
the  lowest  evaluated  bid,  best  offer,  by  the  procurement  entity  in  order  to  
ensure  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  this  Act  and  its  operating  
instructions and guidelines; 
(b)  subject  to  subsection  (2)(a),  give  concurrent  approval  or  otherwise  to  
enable the procurement entity continue with the procurement process; 
(c)  furnish the Board with reports in a prescribed format; 
(d)  participate in public procurement fora; and 
(e)  review decisions of heads of entities in respect of a complaint. 
(3)  A  Tender  Review  Board  may  engage  the  services  of  such  consultants  and  
advisers, or co-opt persons with specialized expertise as it may require for the proper and 
efficient discharge of its functions. 
 
P
ART III—PROCUREMENT RULES 
Procurement plan 
21. (1) A procurement entity shall prepare a procurement plan to support its approved 
programme and the plan shall indicate  
(a)  contract  packages,  
(b)  estimated cost for each package, 
(c)  the procurement method, and 
(d)  processing steps and times. 
(2)  A  procurement  entity  shall  submit  to  its  Tender  Committee  not  later  than  one  
month  to  the  end  of  the  financial  year  the  procurement  plan  for  the  following  year  for  
approval. 
(3)  After  budget  approval  and  at  quarterly  intervals  after  that,  each  procurement  
entity shall submit an update of the procurement plan to the Tender Committee. 
(4)  The  procurement  entity  shall  send  to  the  Tender  Review  Board,  procurement  
notices for contracts and procurement plans above the thresholds stipulated in Schedule 3 
for publication in the Public Procurement Bulletin. 
(5) A procurement entity shall not divide a procurement order into parts or lower 
the  value  of  a  procurement  order  to  avoid  the  application  of  the  procedures  for  public  
procurement in this Act. 
Qualification of tenderers 
22. (1) A tenderer in public procurement shall  
(a)  possess the necessary  
(i)   professional and technical qualifications and competence; 
(ii)  financial  resources;  
(iii) equipment and other physical facilities; 
(iv)  managerial  capability,  reliability,  experience  in  the  procurement  
object and reputation; and 
(v)  the personnel to perform the procurement contract; 
(b)  have the legal capacity to enter the contract; 
(c)  be  solvent,  not  be  in  receivership,  bankrupt  or  in  the  process  of  being  
wound up, not have its business activities suspended and not be the subject 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
of legal proceedings that would materially affect its capacity to enter into a 
contract; 
(d)  have  fulfilled  its  obligations  to  pay  taxes  and  social  security  contributions  
and any paid compensation due for damage caused to property by pollution; 
(e)  have directors or officers who have not in any country been 
(i)   convicted  of  any  criminal  offence  relating  to  their  professional  
conduct  or  to  making  false  statements  or  misrepresentations  as  to  
their  qualifications  to  enter  into  a  procurement  contract,  within  a  
period    of    ten    years    preceding    the    commencement    of    the    
procurement proceedings; or 
(ii)  disqualified  pursuant  to  administrative  suspension  or  disbarment  
proceedings. 
(f)  meet such other criteria as the procurement entity considers appropriate. 
(2)   The   procurement   entity   may   require   tenderers   to   provide   appropriate   
documentary  evidence  or  other  information  that  it  considers  useful  to  satisfy  itself  that  
the tenderers are qualified in accordance with the criteria referred to in subsection (1). 
(3)  Any  requirement  established  pursuant  to  this  section  stated  in  the  tender  
documents  or  other  documents  for  invitation  of  proposals  shall  apply  equally  to  the  
tenderers. 
(4)  The  procurement  entity  shall  evaluate  the  qualifications  of  candidates  in  
accordance  with  the  criteria  and  procedures  stated  in  the  documents  referred  to  in  
subsection (3). 
(5)  The  procurement  entity  shall  disqualify  a  tenderer  who  submits  a  document  
containing false information for purposes of qualification. 
(6)  The  procurement  entity  may  disqualify  a  candidate  if  it  finds  at  any  time  that  
the  information  submitted  concerning  the  qualifications  of  the  candidate  was  materially  
inaccurate or materially incomplete. 
Prequalification proceedings 
23. (1)  A  procurement  entity  may  engage  in  prequalification  proceedings  to  identify  
tenderers who are qualified prior to the submission of tenders. 
(2) Tenderers for prequalification proceedings shall meet the qualification criteria 
of the procurement entity and the proceedings shall be conducted pursuant to Part IV and 
V. 
(3) A procurement entity shall supply a set of  prequalification  documents to each 
supplier or contractor that requests them; and the price that a procurement entity charges 
for  the  prequalification  documents  shall  reflect  the  cost  of  printing  and  provision  to  
suppliers or contractors. 
(4) The prequalification documents shall include 
(a)  instructions to prepare and submit prequalification applications; 
(b)  a  summary  of  the  main  terms  and  conditions  required  for  the  procurement  
contract to be entered into as a result of the procurement proceedings; 
(c)  any  documentary  evidence  or  other  information  that  must  be  submitted  by  
suppliers or contractors to demonstrate their qualifications; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(d)  the  manner  and  place  for  the  submission  of  applications  to  prequalify  and  
the deadline for the submission, expressed as a specific date and time which 
allows  sufficient  time  for  suppliers  or  contractors  to  prepare  and  submit  
their   applications,   taking   into   account   the   reasonable   needs   of   the   
procurement entity; 
(e)  any other requirement that may be established by the procurement entity in 
conformity  with  this  Act  and  procurement  regulations  relating  to  the  
preparation   and   submission   of   applications   to   prequalify   and   to   the   
prequalification proceedings; and 
(f)  in proceedings under Part V, the information required to be specified in the 
invitation to tender by section 48(1)(a) to (e) and if the information required 
under  section  48(1)(a)  to  (e)  is  already  known,  the  information  required  
under paragraphs (j) and (k) of section 48(1). 
(5) The procurement entity shall respond to any request by a supplier or contractor 
for  clarification  of  the  prequalification  documents  if  the  request  is  made  at  least  within  
ten days prior to the deadline for the submission of applications to prequalify. 
(6) The response by the procurement entity shall be given within a reasonable time 
and  in  any  event  within  a  period  of  at  least  seven  working  days  so  as  to  enable  the  
supplier or contractor to make a timely submission of its application to prequalify. 
(7) The response to any request that might reasonably be expected to be of interest 
to  other  suppliers  or  contractors  shall,  without  identifying  the  source  of  the  request,  be  
communicated  to  other  suppliers  or  contractors  provided  with  the  prequalification  
documents by the procurement entity. 
Decision on prequalification 
24. (1)  The  procurement  entity  shall  make  a  decision  with  respect  to  the  qualification  
of each supplier or contractor submitting an application to prequalify and in reaching that 
decision shall apply only the criteria set out in the prequalification documents. 
(2)  The  procurement  entity  shall  promptly  notify  each  supplier  or  contractor  
submitting  an  application  to  prequalify  of  whether  or  not  it  has  been  prequalified  and  
shall make available to any member of the general public upon request, the names of the 
suppliers or contractors who have been prequalified. 
(3) Suppliers or contractors who have been prequalified may participate further in 
the procurement proceedings. 
(4)  The  procurement  entity  shall  upon  request  communicate  to  suppliers  or  
contractors  who  have  not  been  prequalified,  the  grounds  for  disqualification  but  the  
procurement  entity  is  not  required  to  specify  the  evidence  or  give  the  reasons  for  its  
finding on the grounds. 
(5)  The  procurement  entity  may  require  a  supplier  or  contractor  who  has  been  
prequalified  to  demonstrate  its  qualifications  again  in  accordance  with  the  same  criteria  
used to prequalify the supplier or contractor.  
(6) The procurement entity shall disqualify any supplier or contractor who fails to 
demonstrate its qualification again if requested to do so.  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(7)  The  procurement  entity  shall  promptly  notify  each  supplier  or  contractor  
requested to demonstrate its qualifications again whether or not the supplier or contractor 
has done so to the satisfaction of the procurement entity. 
Participation in procurement proceedings 
25. Participation in procurement proceedings shall be on a competitive basis subject to 
sections 44, 45 and 46. 
Form of communication 
26. Communication between procurement entities and tenderers shall be in writing and 
communications in any other form shall be referred to and confirmed in writing. 
Documentary evidence in procurement proceedings 
27. The documentary evidence required in procurement proceedings shall comply with 
the Evidence Decree, 1975 (N.R.C.D. 323) 
Record of procurement proceedings 
28. (1)  A  procurement  entity  shall  maintain  a  record  of  the  procurement  proceedings  
containing the following information 
(a) a brief description of the goods, works or services to be procured, or of the 
procurement  need  for  which  the  procurement  entity  invited  proposals  or  
offers; 
(b) the names and addresses of suppliers or contractors that submitted tenders, 
proposals, offers or quotations, and the name and address of the supplier or 
contractor with whom the procurement contract is entered; 
(c)  information  relating  to  the  qualifications,  or  lack  of  qualifications  of  
suppliers   or   contractors   that   submitted   tenders,   proposals,   offers   or   
quotations; 
(d) the price, or the basis for determining the price and a summary of the other 
principal  terms  and  conditions  of  each  tender,  proposal,  offer  or  quotation  
and  of  the  procurement  contract  if  these  are  known  to  the  procurement  
entity; 
(e)  a  summary  of  the  evaluation  and  comparison  of  tenders,  proposals  under  
section  69,  offers  or  quotations  including  the  application  of  any  margin  of  
preference pursuant to section 60; 
(f)   if  the  tenders,  proposals,  offers  or  quotations  were  rejected,  a  statement  to  
that effect and the grounds for the rejection; 
(g)  if,  in  procurement  proceedings  involving  methods  of  procurement  other  
than tendering, those proceedings did not result in a procurement contract, a 
statement to that effect and  the reasons; 
(h)  the  information  required  under  section  29,  if  a  tender,  proposal,  offer  or  
quotation was rejected pursuant to that provision; 
(i)   a  statement  of  the  grounds  and  circumstances  on  which  the  procurement  
entity relied to justify the selection of the method of procurement used; 
(j)  in the procurement of services by means of Part VI, the statement required 
under   section   71   of   the   grounds   and   circumstances   on   which   the   
procurement entity relied to justify the selection procedure used; 
(k)  in  procurement  proceedings  involving  direct  invitation  of  proposals  for  
services  in  accordance  with  section  63(3),  a  statement  of  the  grounds  and  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
circumstances  on  which  the  procurement  entity  relied  to  justify  the  direct  
invitation; 
(l)  in procurement proceedings in which the procurement entity, in accordance 
with  section  25(1),  limits  participation  on  the  basis  of  nationality,  a  
statement of the grounds and circumstances relied upon by the procurement 
entity for the limitation; 
(m)  a  summary  of  any  requests  for  clarification  of  the  prequalification  or  
invitation  documents,  the  responses  received  as  well  as  a  summary  of  any  
modification of the documents;  
(n)   a   record   of   any   complaints   received   from   suppliers,   contractors   or   
consultants and the responses received. 
(2)  Subject  to  section  51(2),  the  portion  of  the  record  referred  to  in  subsection  
(1)(a) and (b) shall, on request, be made available to any person after a tender, proposal, 
offer  or  quotation  has  been  accepted  or  after  procurement  proceedings  have  been  
terminated without resulting in a procurement contract. 
(3) Subject to section 51(2), the portion of the record referred to in subparagraphs 
(c)  to  (g)  and  (m)  of  subsection  (1)  shall,  on  request,  be  made  available  to  suppliers,  
contractors  or  consultants  that  submitted  tenders,  proposals,  offers  or  quotations,  or  
applied for prequalification after a tender, proposal, offer or quotation has been accepted 
or  procurement  proceedings  have  been  terminated  without  resulting  in  a  procurement  
contract.  
(4) Disclosure of the portion of the record referred to in subsections (1) (c) to (e), 
and  (1)(m),  may  be  ordered  at  an  earlier  stage  by  a  competent  court;  except  that  when  
ordered to do so by a competent court and subject to the conditions of the court order, the 
procurement entity shall not disclose 
(a)  information, if its disclosure would  
(i)   be contrary to law;  
(ii)  impede law enforcement,  
(iii) not be in the public interest;  
(iv) prejudice legitimate commercial interests of the parties; or  
(v)   inhibit  fair  competition  as  provided  under  the  Protection  Against  
Unfair Competition Act, 2000 (Act 589); or 
(b)  information  relating  to  the  examination,  evaluation  and  comparison  of  
tenders,  proposals,  offers  or  quotations  and  tenders,  proposal,  offer  or  
quotation prices, other than the summary referred to in subsection(1) (e) of 
this section. 
(5) The procurement entity is not liable to tenderers for damages owing solely to a 
failure  to  maintain  a  record  of  the  procurement  proceedings  in  accordance  with  this  
section. 
(6)  Records  and  documents  maintained  by  procurement  entities  on  procurement  
shall  be  made  available  for  inspection  by  the  Public Procurement Board, an investigator 
appointed  by  the  Board  and  the  Auditor-General  upon  request;  and  where  donor  funds  
have  been  used  for  the  procurement,  donor  officials  shall  also  upon  request  to  the  
Minister  have  access  to  relevant  procurement  files  for  purposes  of  verification  and  
review. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
Rejection of tenders, proposals and quotations 
29. (1) A procurement entity may reject tenders, proposals and quotations at any time 
prior to acceptance if the grounds for the rejection are specified in the tender documents 
or in the request for proposals or quotations. 
(2)   The   grounds   for   rejection   shall   be   communicated   to   the   tenderer   but   
justification  for  the  rejection  is  not  required  and  the  procurement  entity  shall  not  incur  
liability towards the tenderer. 
(3) Notice of the rejection shall be given to participating tenderers within two days 
from the date the procurement entity decides to discontinue with the tender process. 
(4)  If  the  decision  to  reject  tenders  is  taken  before  the  closing  date,  tenders  
received shall be returned unopened to the tenderers submitting them. 
(5)  The  rejection  of  the  tender,  proposal,  offer  or  quotation  with  reasons  shall  be  
recorded in the procurement proceedings and promptly communicated to the supplier or 
contractor. 
Entry into force of the procurement contract 
30. (1)  In  tender  proceedings,  acceptance  of  the  tender  and  entry  into  force  of  the  
procurement contract shall be carried out in accordance with section 65 of this Act. 
(2)  In  the  other  methods  of  procurement,  the  manner  of  entry  into  force  of  the  
procurement  contract  shall  be  notified  to  the  suppliers  or  contractors  at  the  time  those  
proposals, offers or quotations are requested. 
Public notice of procurement contract awards 
31. (1)  A  procurement  entity  shall  promptly  publish  notice  of  procurement  contract  
awards. 
(2)  Regulations  shall  provide  for  the  manner  of  publication  of  the  notice  of  
procurement contract awards. 
Inducements from suppliers, contractors and consultants 
32. A  procurement  entity  shall  reject  a  tender,  proposal,  offer  or  quotation  if  the  
supplier, contractor or consultant that submitted it offers, gives or agrees to give, directly 
or  indirectly,  to  any  current  or  former  officer  or  employee  of  the  procurement  entity  or  
other governmental authority, 
(a)  a gratuity in any form; 
(b)  an offer of employment; or 
(c)  any other thing of service or value 
as  an  inducement  with  respect  to  anything  connected  with  a  procurement  entity  and  
procurement proceedings. 
Description of goods, works or services 
33. (1) Any  
(a)  specifications,  plans,  drawings  and  designs  that  provide  the  technical  or  
quality characteristics of goods, works, or services to be procured;  
(b) requirements on testings and test methods, packaging, marketing, labelling 
or conformity certifications; and 
(c)  symbols  and  terminology  description  of  services  that  create  obstacles  to  
participation including obstacles based on nationality 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
tenderers   shall   not   be   included   or   used   in   prequalification   documents,   invitation   
documents or other documents for invitation of proposals, offers or quotations.   
(2)  The  provisions  in  subsection(1)  shall  be  based  on  objective  technical  and  
quality characteristics of the goods, works or services to be procured and there shall be no 
requirement of or reference to a particular trade mark, name, patent, design, type, specific 
origin or producer, unless a precise or intelligible way of describing the characteristics of 
the goods, works or services to be procured does not exist, in which case, the words “or 
equivalent” shall be included. 
(3)  Standardised  features,  requirements,  symbols  and  terminology  relating  to  the  
technical and quality characteristics of the goods, works or services to be procured shall 
be used, where available, to formulate any specifications, plans, drawings and designs to 
be  included  in  the  prequalification  documents,  invitation  documents  or  other  documents  
for invitation of proposals, offers or quotations. 
Language 
34. The  prequalification  documents,  invitation  documents  and  other  documents  for  
invitation of proposals, offers or quotations shall be in English. 
 
P
ART IV—METHODS OF PROCUREMENT 
Competitive tendering 
35. (1)  A  procurement  entity  shall  procure  goods  ,  services  or  works  by  competitive  
tendering except as provided in this Part. 
(2) A procurement entity shall use the quality and cost-based method of selection 
in Part VI when selecting consultants unless the procurement entity determines that 
(a) it is feasible to formulate detailed specifications and tendering proceedings 
or  other  methods  of  procurement  which  are  more  appropriate  taking  into  
account the nature of the services to be procured; or 
(b) it is more appropriate to use a method of selection referred to in Part VI  if 
the conditions for the use of that method are satisfied. 
(3)   If   the   procurement   entity   uses   the   method   of   procurement   other   than   
competitive  tendering,  it  shall  include  in  the  record  required  a  statement  of  the  grounds  
and circumstances on which it relied to justify the use of that method. 
Two-stage tendering 
36. (1) A procurement entity shall engage in procurement by two-stage tendering  
(a)  where  it  is  not  feasible  for  the  procurement  entity  to  formulate  detailed  
specifications for the goods or works or, in the case of services, to identify 
their  characteristics  and  where  it  seeks  tenders,  proposals  or  offers  on  
various means of meeting its needs in order to obtain the most satisfactory 
solution  to  its  procurement  needs;  or  where  the  character  of  the  goods  or  
works are subject to rapid technological advances; 
(b)  where  the  procurement  entity  seeks  to  enter  into  a  contract  for  research,  
experiment,  study  or  development,  except  where  the  contract  includes  the  
production  of  goods  in  sufficient  quantities  to  establish  their  commercial  
viability or to recover research and development costs. 
Procedures for two-stage tendering 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
37. (1) The provisions of Part V shall apply to two-stage tendering proceedings except 
to the extent that those provisions vary from this section. 
(2) The invitation documents  
(a)  shall  call  upon  suppliers  or  contractors  to  submit,  in  the  first  stage  of  two-
stage  tendering  proceedings,  initial  tenders  which  contain  their  proposals  
without a tender price; 
(b) may solicit proposals that relate to technical, quality or other characteristics 
of the goods, works or services as well as contractual terms and conditions 
of supply and may stipulate the professional and technical competence and 
qualifications of the suppliers or contractors. 
(3) The procurement entity may, in the first stage, engage in negotiations with any 
supplier  or  contractor  whose  tender  has  not  been  rejected  under  section  29,  32  or  62(6)  
with respect to any aspect of its tender. 
(4) In the second stage of the two tender proceedings the procurement entity, 
(a) shall invite suppliers or contractors whose tenders have not been rejected to 
submit final tenders with prices on a single set of specifications; 
(b)  may  in  formulating  the  specifications,  delete  or  modify  any  aspect  of  the  
technical  or  quality  characteristics  of  the  goods,  works  or  services  to  be  
procured  together  with  any  criterion  originally  set  out  in  those  documents,    
evaluate and compare tenders and ascertain the successful tender; 
(c)  may add new characteristics or criteria that conform with this Act;  
(d)  shall  communicate  to  suppliers  or  contractors  in  the  invitation  to  submit  
final tenders, any deletion, modification or addition; 
(e)  may  permit  a  supplier  or  contractor  who  does  not  wish  to  submit  a  final  
tender  to  withdraw  from  the  tendering  proceedings  without  the  supplier  or  
contactor  forfeiting  any  tender  security  that  the  supplier  or  contractor  may  
have been required to provide.  
(5)  The  final  tenders  shall  be  evaluated  and  compared  in  order  to  ascertain  the  
successful tender as defined in section 59(3)(b). 
Restricted tendering 
38. A procurement entity may for reasons of economy and efficiency and subject to the 
approval of the Board engage in procurement by means of restricted tendering  
(a)  if  goods,  works  or  services  are  available  only  from  a  limited  number  of  
suppliers or contractors; or 
(b)  if  the  time  and  cost  required  to  examine  and  evaluate  a  large  number  of  
tenders is disproportionate to the value of the goods, works or services to be 
procured. 
Procedure for restricted tendering 
39. (1)  Where  a  procurement  entity  engages  in  restricted  tendering  on  the  grounds  
referred to in section 38(a), it shall 
(a)  invite  tenders  from  the  suppliers  and  contractors  who  can  provide  the  
goods, works or services; 
(b) select in a non-discriminatory manner, a number of suppliers or contractors 
to ensure effective competition. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(2)  Where  the  procurement  entity  engages  in  restricted  tendering,  it  shall  cause  a  
notice  of  the  selective-tendering  award  to  be  published  in  the  Public  Procurement  
Bulletin. 
(3) The provisions of Part V of this Act, except section 47 , shall apply to selective 
tendering proceedings, except to the extent that those provisions are varied in this section. 
Single-source procurement 
40. (1)  A  procurement  entity  may  engage  in  single-source  procurement  under  section  
41 with the approval of the Board, 
(a)  where goods, works or services are only available from a particular supplier 
or contractor, or if a particular supplier or contractor has exclusive rights in 
respect  of  the  goods,  works  or  services,  and  no  reasonable  alternative  or  
substitute exists; 
(b)  where there is an urgent need for the goods, works or services and engaging 
in  tender  proceedings  or  any  other  method  of  procurement  is  impractical  
due to unforeseeable circumstances giving rise to the urgency which is not 
the result of dilatory conduct on the part of the procurement entity; 
(c)  where owing to a catastrophic event, there is an urgent need for the goods, 
works  or  technical  services,  making  it  impractical  to  use  other  methods  of  
procurement because of the time involved in using those methods; 
(d)   where   a   procurement   entity   which   has   procured   goods,   equipment,   
technology or services from a supplier or contractor, determines that 
(i)   additional  supplies  need  to  be  procured  from  that  supplier  or  
contractor because of standardisation; 
(ii)   there  is  a  need  for  compatibility  with  existing  goods,  equipment,  
technology or services, taking into account the effectiveness of the 
original  procurement  in  meeting  the  needs  of  the  procurement  
entity; 
(iii)  the  limited  size  of  the  proposed  procurement  in  relation  to  the  
original procurement provides justification; 
(e)  where the procurement entity seeks to enter into a contract with the supplier 
or contractor for research, experiment, study or development, except where 
the  contract  includes  the  production  of  goods  in  quantities  to  establish  
commercial viability or recover research and development costs; or 
(f)  where the procurement entity applies this Act for procurement that concerns 
national security, and determines that single-source procurement is the most 
appropriate method of procurement. 
(2)  A  procurement  entity  may  engage  in  single-source  procurement  with  the  
approval of the Board after public notice and time for comment where procurement from 
a  particular  supplier  or  contractor  is  necessary  in  order  to  promote  a  policy  specified  in  
section  59(4)(c),  (d)  or  69(2)(c)(i),  and  procurement  from  another  supplier  or  contractor  
cannot promote that policy. 
Procedure for single-source procurement 
41. The  procurement  entity  may  procure  the  goods,  works  or  technical  services  by  
inviting  a  proposal  or  price  quotation  from  a  single  supplier  or  contractor  under  section  
40. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
Request for quotations 
42. A  procurement  entity  may  engage  in  procurement  by  requesting  quotations  in  
accordance with section 43,  
(a)  for  readily  available  goods  or  technical  services  that  are  not  specially  
produced  or  provided  to  the  particular  specifications  of  the  procurement  
entity; and 
(b) for goods where there is an established market if the estimated value of the 
procurement contract is less than the amount in Schedule 3. 
Procedure for request for quotation  
43. (1)  The  procurement  entity  shall  request  quotations  from  as  many  suppliers  or  
contractors as practicable, but from at least three different sources. 
(2)  Each  supplier  or  contractor  from  whom  a  quotation  is  requested  shall  be  
informed  whether  any  elements,  apart  from  the  charges  for  the  goods  or  services  
themselves, such as transportation and insurance charges, customs duties and taxes, are to 
be included in the price. 
(3)  Each  supplier  or  contractor  shall  only  give  one  price  quotation  and  shall  not  
change its quotation; 
(4) No negotiations shall take place between the procurement entity and a supplier 
or contractor with respect to a quotation submitted by the supplier or contractor, prior to 
evaluation of bids. 
 
P
ART V—TENDERING PROCEDURES 
Sub-Part I—Invitation of Tenders and  Applications to Prequalify 
National competitive tendering 
44. (1)  In  procurement  proceedings  in  which  the  procurement  entity  decides  that  only  
domestic  suppliers  or  contractors  may  submit  tenders,  the  procurement  entity  shall  
employ national competitive tendering procedures.  
(2)  The  procurement  entity  is  not  required  to  employ  the  procedures  set  out  in  
sections  47  and  48  of  this  Act  if  the  estimated  contract  amount  is  lower  than  the  value  
threshold specified in Schedule 3. 
(3)  The  procurement  entity  may  stipulate  in  the  tender  documents  that  tenderers  
must  quote  only  in  the  local  currency  and  payments  must  be  made  wholly  in  the  local  
currency. 
International competitive tendering 
45. (1)  International  competitive  tendering  shall  be  used  whenever  open  competitive  
tendering  is  used  and  effective  competition  cannot  be  obtained  unless  foreign  firms  are  
invited to tender. 
(2) Open international tendering shall be in accordance with Part IV and Part V of 
this Act and the following shall also apply: 
(a) the invitation to tender and tender documents must be in English, subject to 
sections 34 and 52; 
(b)  the  invitation  to  tender  shall  be  placed  in  a  newspaper  with  adequate  
circulation to attract foreign competition as provided under section 47; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(c)  at  least  six  weeks  shall  be  allowed  for  submission  of  tenders  in  order  to  
allow  sufficient  time  for  the  invitation  to  reach  candidates  and  to  enable  
them to prepare and submit the tenders as provided in section 53; 
(d)   technical   specifications   shall,   to   the   extent   compatible   with   national   
requirements, be based on international standards or standards widely used 
in  international  trade  and  in  particular  shall  conform  to  the  provisions  of  
sections 33 and 50(3); 
(e)  tenderers  are  permitted  to  express  their  tenders,  as  well  as  any  security  
documents  to  be  presented  by  them,  in  freely  convertible  currency  and  
stated  in  the  tender  documents,  subject  to  section  50(3)  and  section  
55(2)(c); and 
(f)  general and special conditions of contract as stated in the tender documents. 
Other international procedures 
46. Part  IV  and  Part  V  shall  apply  with  such  modification  as  may  be  necessary  
whenever  effective  competition  cannot  be  obtained  unless  foreign  firms  are  invited  to  
participate  in  procedures  apart  from  open  competitive  international  tendering  such  as  
selective tendering or invitation for proposals. 
Procedures for inviting tenders or applications to prequalify  
47. (1)  A  procurement  entity  shall  invite  tenders  or,  where  applicable,  applications  to  
prequalify  by  causing  an  invitation  to  tender  or  an  invitation  to  prequalify,  to  be  
published in the Procurement Bulletin. 
(2) The invitation to tender or invitation to prequalify shall also be published in at 
least two newspapers of wide national circulation. 
(3)  The  invitation  may  also  be  published  in  a  newspaper  of  wide  international  
circulation,  in  a  relevant  trade  publication  or  technical  or  professional  journal  of  wide  
international circulation. 
Contents of invitation to tender and invitation to prequalify 
48. (1) The invitation to tender shall contain the following information: 
(a)  the name and address of the procurement entity; 
(b)  the  nature,  quantity  and  place  of  delivery  of  the  goods  to  be  supplied,  the  
country of origin, the nature and location of the works to be effected or the 
nature  of  the  technical  services  and  the  location  where  they  are  to  be  
provided; 
(c)  the  desired  or  required  time  for  the  supply  of  the  goods  or  for  the  
completion of the works, or the timetable for the provision of the services; 
(d)  the  criteria  and  procedures  to  be  used  to  evaluate  the  qualifications  of  
suppliers or contractors, in conformity with section 23; 
(e)  a  declaration,  which  may  not  be  subsequently  altered  that  suppliers  or  
contractors  may  participate  in  the  procurement  proceedings  regardless  of  
nationality,  or  a  declaration  that  participation  is  limited  on  the  basis  of  
nationality under section 25; 
(f)  the means of obtaining the invitation  documents  and  the  place  from  where  
they may be obtained; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(g)  the  price,  if  any,  charged  by  the  procurement  entity  for  the  invitation  
documents; 
(h)  the currency and means of payment for the invitation documents; 
(i)  the language in which the invitation documents are available; 
(j)  the place and deadline for the submission of tenders; 
(k)  the place, date and time for the opening of bids; and 
(l)  any other information considered relevant. 
(2)   An   invitation   to   prequalify   shall   contain   the   information   referred   to   in   
subsection (1)(a) to (e), (g), (h) and, if the information required under those paragraphs is 
already  known,  contain  the  information  required  under  subsection  (1)  (j),  as  well  as  the  
following information 
(a)  the  means  to  obtain  the  pre-qualification  documents  and  the  place  from  
where they can be obtained; 
(b)  the  price  charged  by  the  procurement  entity  for  the  pre-qualification  
documents; 
(c)  the currency and terms of payment for the pre-qualification documents; 
(d)  the language in which the pre-qualification documents are available; 
(e)  the place and deadline for the submission of applications to prequalify and 
the  time  allowed  for  the  preparation  of  pre-qualification  applications  shall  
not be less than four weeks. 
Provision of tender documents 
49. (1)  The  procurement  entity  shall  provide  the  tender  documents  to  suppliers  or  
contractors in accordance with the procedures and requirements specified in the invitation 
to tender. 
(2) If pre-qualification proceedings have taken place, the procurement entity shall 
provide   a   set   of   tender   documents   to   each   supplier   or   contractor   that   has   been   
prequalified and that pays the price charged for those documents. 
(3)  The  price  that  the  procurement  entity  may  charge  for  the  tender  documents  
shall reflect the cost of printing them and providing them to suppliers or contractors. 
Contents of tender documents and use of standard tender documents 
50. (1)  Procurement  entities  shall  use  the  appropriate  standard  tender  documents  
stipulated in Schedule 4 with such minimum changes acceptable to the Board. 
(2)  Changes  shall  be  introduced  only  through  tender  or  contract  data  sheets,  or  
through  special  conditions  of  contract  and  not  by  introducing  changes  in  the  standard  
tender documents. 
(3) The invitation documents shall include, 
(a)  instructions  for  preparing tenders; 
(b) the criteria and procedures, in conformity with the provisions of section 22, 
for the evaluation of the qualifications of suppliers or contractors; 
(c)  the  requirements  on  additional  documentary  evidence  or  other  information  
that  is  to  be  submitted  by  suppliers  or  contractors  to  demonstrate  their  
qualifications; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(d)  the  nature  and  required  technical  and  quality  characteristics,  in  relation  to  
the  goods,  works  or  technical  services  to  be  procured  under  section  33    
including, but not limited to, 
(i)   technical   specifications,   plans, drawings and designs, 
(ii)  the quantity of the goods;  
(iii) any incidental services to be performed;  
(iv) the location where the works is to be effected or the services are to 
be provided; and  
(v)  the  desired  or  required  time,  if  any  when  the  goods  are  to  be  
delivered, the construction is to be effected or the services are to be 
provided; 
(e)  the criteria to be used by the procurement entity to determine the successful 
tender, including any margin of preference and any criteria other  than price 
to be used under section 59(4)(b)(c) or (d) and the factors apart from price 
to  be  used  to  determine  the  lowest  evaluated  bid,  shall,  to  the  extent  
practicable,  be  expressed  in  monetary  terms,  or  given  a  relative  weight  in  
the evaluation provisions in the tender documents; 
(f)  the terms and conditions of the procurement contract and the contract form 
to be signed by the parties; 
(g)   a   statement   that   the   characteristics   of   the   goods,   works   or   services,   
contractual  terms  and  conditions  or  other  requirements  set  out  in  the  
invitation  documents  are  permitted,  and  a  description  of  the  manner  in  
which alternative tenders are to be evaluated and compared; 
(h) a description of the portion or portions for which tenders may be submitted 
where  suppliers  or  contractors  are  permitted  to  submit  tenders  for  only  a  
portion of the goods, works or services to be procured; 
(i)   the  manner  in  which  the  tender  price  is  to  be  formulated  and  expressed,  
including  a  statement  whether  the  price  covers  elements  apart  from  the  
goods,  works  or  services,    such  as  applicable  transportation  and  insurance  
charges, customs duties and taxes; 
(j)  the currency or currencies in which the tender price is to be formulated and 
expressed; 
(k)  the  language  in  conformity  with  section  52,  in  which  tenders  are  to  be  
prepared; 
(l)  any requirements of  
(i)   the  procurement  entity  connected  with  the  issue,  nature,  form,  
amount and other principal terms and conditions of tender security 
to be provided by suppliers or contractors submitting tenders; and 
(ii)  security  for  the  performance  of  the  procurement  contract  to  be  
provided   by   a   supplier   or   contractor   that   enters   into   the   
procurement   contract,   including   securities   such   as   labour   and   
materials bonds; 
(m) a statement that a supplier or contractor can modify or withdraw its tender 
prior  to  the  deadline  for  the  submission  of  tenders  without  forfeiting  its  
tender security;  
(n)  the manner, place and deadline for the submission of tenders; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(o)  the  means  by  which  suppliers  or  contractors  may  seek  clarification  of  the  
invitation  documents  and  a  statement  whether  the  procurement  entity  
intends to convene a meeting of suppliers or contractors; 
(p)  the period of time during which tenders will be in effect; 
(q)  the place, date and time for the opening of tenders; 
(r)  the procedures to be followed for opening and examining tenders; 
(s)  the  currency  that  will  be  used  to  evaluate  and  compare  tenders  under  
section 58 and either the exchange rate that will be used for the conversion 
of  tenders  into  that  currency  or  a  statement  that  the  rate  published  by  a  
specified financial institution prevailing on a specified date will be used; 
(t)  references  to  this  Act,  the  procurement  regulations  and  other  Acts  and  
regulations relevant to the procurement proceedings, but the omission of the 
reference shall not constitute grounds for review under Part VII  or give rise 
to liability on the part of the procurement entity; 
(u) the name, functional title and address of one or more officers or employees 
of the procurement entity who are authorised to communicate directly with 
and  to  receive  communications  directly  from  a  supplier  or  contractor  in  
connection  with  the  procurement  proceedings,  without  the  intervention  of  
an intermediary; 
(v)  any  commitments  to  be  made  by  the  supplier  or  contractor  outside  the  
procurement  contract,  such  as  commitments  relating  to  countertrade  or  to  
the transfer of technology; 
(w) a statement of the right to seek review of an unlawful act or decision of, or 
procedure followed by the procurement entity in relation to the procurement 
proceedings; 
(x)  if the procurement entity reserves the right to reject tenders, a statement to 
that effect; 
(y)  any formalities that will be required once a tender has been accepted, for a 
procurement  contract  to  enter  into  force,  including,  where  applicable,  the  
execution   of   a   written   procurement   contract   and   approval   by   the   
Government and the estimated period of time following the despatch of the 
notice of acceptance that will be required to obtain the approval; and 
(z)  any other requirements established by the procurement entity under this Act 
and Regulations relating to the preparation and submission of tenders and to 
other aspects of the procurement proceedings. 
Clarifications and modifications of tender documents  
51. (1)    A    supplier    or    contractor    may    request    promptly    clarification    of    the                      
tender documents from the procurement entity. 
             (2) The  procurement  entity  shall  respond  to  a  request  by  a  supplier  or 
contractor  within  a  reasonable  time  before  the  deadline  for  the  submission  of  tenders  to  
enable the supplier or contractor make a timely submission of its tender and shall without 
disclosing  the  source  of  the  request  communicate  the  clarification  to  the  suppliers  or  
contractors provided with the invitation documents. 
(3)  The  procurement  entity  may  modify  the  invitation  documents  by  issuing  an  
addendum prior to the deadline for submission of tenders. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(4) The addendum shall be communicated promptly to the suppliers or contractors 
provided with the invitation documents by the procurement entity and shall be binding on 
those suppliers or contractors. 
(5) The procurement entity may convene a meeting of suppliers and contractors to 
clarify and modify tender documents and shall prepare minutes of any previous meeting 
concerned  with  clarification  of  the  invitation  documents  without  identifying  the  sources  
of the requests. 
(6) The minutes shall be given promptly to the suppliers and contractors provided 
with the invitation documents by the procurement entity to enable them take the minutes 
into account in the preparation of their tenders. 
Sub-Part II—Submission of Tenders 
Language of tenders  
52. (1) Tenders shall be formulated and submitted in English. 
(2)  Supporting  documents  and  printed  literature furnished by the tenderer may be 
in  another  language  if  they  are  accompanied  by  an  accurate  translation  of  the  relevant  
passages in English. 
(3) Where there is a translation, the translation shall be used to interpret the tender. 
Submission of tenders 
53. (1) The procurement entity shall,  
(a)  fix  the  place  for,  and  a  specific  date  and  time  as  the  deadline  for  the  
submission of tenders; and 
(b)  allow  tenderers  at  least  six  weeks  to  prepare  their  tenders  for  international  
competitive tendering. 
(2)  The  time  for  preparation  of  tenders  under  national  competitive  tendering  
procedures shall not exceed four weeks. 
(3)  If  a  procurement  entity  issues  clarification  or  modification  documents  or  if  a  
meeting  of  tenderers  is  held,  the  procurement  entity  shall  prior  to  the  expiry  of  the  
deadline  for  the  submission  of  tenders  extend  the  deadline  to  give  the  suppliers  and  
contractors reasonable time to take the clarification or modification, or the minutes of the 
meeting into account in their tenders. 
(4) The procurement entity may, prior to the expiry of deadline for the submission 
of tenders, extend the deadline. 
(5)  The  procurement  entity  shall,  at  least  ten  days  before  the  expiry  of  the  
deadline, give notice of an extension of the deadline by fax, e-mail or any other expedited 
written means of communication to each supplier or contractor to whom the procurement 
entity provided the tender documents or to any new prospective tenderers.  
(6) A tender shall be in writing, signed and be submitted in a sealed envelope. 
(7)  A  tender  may  alternatively  be  submitted  in  any  other  form  specified  in  the  
tender documents that provides a record of the contents of the tender and a similar degree 
of authenticity, security and confidentiality. 
(8)  The  procurement  entity  shall  provide  the  tenderer  with  a  receipt  showing  the  
date and time when its tender was received. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(9)  A  tender  received  by  the  procurement  entity  after  the  deadline  for  the  
submission  of  tenders  shall  not  be  opened  and  shall  be  returned  to  the  supplier  or  
contractor which submitted it. 
Period of validity of tenders; modification and withdrawal of tenders 
54. (1)  The  period  of  validity  for  a  tender  shall  be  the  period  specified  in  the  tender  
documents. 
(2) A procurement entity may request suppliers or contractors to extend the period 
of validity for an additional specified period of time. 
(3)  A  supplier  or  contractor  may  refuse  the  request  without  forfeiting  its  tender  
security  and  the  effectiveness  of  its  tender  will  terminate  upon  the  expiry  of  the  
unextended period of effectiveness. 
(4)   A   supplier   or   contractor   that   agrees   to   an   extension   of   the   period   of   
effectiveness  of  its  tenders  shall  extend  or  procure  an  extension  of  the  period  of  tender  
securities provided by it or provide new tender securities to cover the extended period of 
effectiveness of its tender. 
(5)  A  supplier  or  contractor  whose  tender  security  is  not  extended  or  that  has  not  
provided  a  new  tender  security  is  considered  to  have  refused  the  request  to  extend  the  
period of effectiveness of its tender. 
(6)  A  supplier  or  contractor  may  modify  or  withdraw  its  tender  prior  to  the  
deadline  for  the  submission  of  tenders  without  forfeiting  its  tender  security  unless  
otherwise stipulated in the tender documents. 
(7)  The  modification  or  notice  of  withdrawal  is  effective  if  it  is  received  by  the  
procurement entity before the deadline for the submission of tenders. 
Tender securities 
55. (1)  The  procurement  entity  shall  specify  the  principal  terms  and  conditions  of  the  
required tender security in the invitation documents. 
(2)  When  the  procurement  entity  requires  suppliers  or  contractors  submitting  
tenders to provide tender security, 
(a)  the requirement shall apply to each supplier or contractor; 
(b) the invitation documents shall stipulate that the issuer and confirmer of the 
tender security are acceptable to the procurement entity; 
(c)  notwithstanding  paragraph  (b), a tender security shall not be rejected by the 
procurement entity on the grounds that the tender security was not issued by 
an  issuer  in  the  country,  if  the  tender  security  and  the  issuer  otherwise  
conform to requirements in the invitation documents; 
(d)  a  supplier  or  contractor  may  request  the  procurement  entity  to  confirm  the  
acceptability  of  a  proposed  issuer  or  a  proposed  confirmer  of  a  tender  
security before submitting a tender and the procurement entity shall respond 
promptly to the request; 
(e)  confirmation  of  the  acceptability  of  a  proposed  issuer  or  of  a  proposed  
confirmer  does  not  preclude  the  procurement  entity  from  rejecting  the  
tender  security  on  the  ground  that  the  issuer  or  confirmer  has  become  
insolvent or is otherwise not creditworthy. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(3) Any requirement on tender security that refers directly or indirectly to conduct 
by the supplier or contractor submitting the tender may only relate to  
(a)  withdrawal  or  modification  of  the  tender  after  the  deadline  for  submission  
of tenders, or before the deadline if stipulated in the invitation documents; 
(b)  failure  to  sign  the  procurement  contract  if  required  by  the  procurement  
entity to do so; 
(c)  failure  to  provide  a  required  security  for  the  performance  of  the  contract  
after  the  tender  has  been  accepted  or  to  comply  with  any  other  condition  
precedent  to  signing  the  procurement  contract  specified  in  the  tender  
documents. 
(4)  The  procurement  entity  shall  not  make  a  claim  to  the  amount  of  the  tender  
security  and  shall  promptly  return  or  procure  the  return  of  the  tender  security  document  
after whichever of the following occurs first 
(a)  the expiry of the tender security; 
(b) the entry into force of a procurement contract and the provision of security 
for  the  performance  of  the  contract,  if  the  security  is  required  by  the  
invitation documents; 
(c)  the termination of the tendering proceedings without the entry into force of 
a procurement contract; or 
(d)  the  withdrawal  of  the  tender  prior  to  the  deadline  for  the  submission  of  
tenders. 
Sub-Part III—Evaluation and Comparison of Tenders 
Opening of tenders 
56. (1) Tenders shall be opened 
(a)  at  the  time  specified  in  the  tender  documents  as  the  deadline  for  the  
submission  of  tenders  or  at  the  deadline  specified  in  any  extension  of  the  
deadline; and 
(b)  at  the  place  and  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  specified  in  the  tender  
documents.  
(2)  The  time  for  opening  of  the  tenders  shall  be  the  same  as  the  deadline  for  
receipt of tenders or promptly after that deadline. 
(3) A supplier or contractor who has submitted a tender or a representative of that 
supplier  or  contractor,  shall  be  permitted  by  the  procurement  entity  to  be  present  at  the  
opening of tenders. 
(4)  The  name  and  address  of  each  supplier  or  contractor  whose  tender  is  opened  
and  the  tender  price  shall  be  announced  to  those  present  at  the  opening  of  tenders  and  
communicated  on  request  to  a  supplier  or  contractor  who  has  submitted  a  tender  but  is  
not present or represented at the opening of the tenders. 
(5)  The  tender  price  shall  be  recorded  immediately  in  the  record  of  tendering  
proceedings. 
Examination of tenders 
57. (1) The procurement entity may ask a supplier or a contractor for clarification of its 
tender in order to assist in the examination, evaluation and comparison of tenders. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(2)  No  change  in  a  matter  of  substance  in  the  tender,  including  changes  in  price  
and changes aimed at making an unresponsive tender responsive, shall be sought, offered 
or permitted. 
(3)  Notwithstanding  subsection  (2),  the  procurement  entity  shall  correct  purely  
arithmetical errors that are discovered during the examination of tenders. 
(4)  The  procurement  entity  shall  give  prompt  notice  of  the  correction  to  the  
supplier or contractor that submitted the tender. 
Responsiveness of tenders 
58. (1)  A  procurement  entity  shall  regard  a  tender  as  responsive  if  it  conforms  to  the  
requirements set out in the tender invitation documents. 
(2)  The  procurement  entity  may,  however,  regard  a  tender  as  responsive  if  it  
contains  minor  deviations  that  do  not  materially  alter  or  depart  from  the  characteristics,  
terms,  conditions  and  other  requirements  set  out  in  the  invitation  documents  or  if  it  
contains errors or oversights that are capable of being corrected without touching on the 
substance of the tender. 
(3)  The  deviations  shall  be  quantified,  to  the  extent  possible,  and  shall  be  taken  
into account in the evaluation and comparison of tenders. 
(4) A procurement entity shall not accept a tender 
(a)  if the supplier or contractor that submitted the tender is not qualified; 
(b)  if  the  tenderer  that  submitted  the  tender  does  not  accept  a  correction  of  an  
arithmetical error made under subsection(1)(b); 
(c)  if the tender is not responsive; 
(d)  in  the  circumstances  referred  to  in  section  32  with  respect  to  inducement  
from a tenderer. 
Evaluation of tenders 
59. (1)  The  procurement  entity  shall  evaluate  and  compare  the  tenders  that  have  been  
accepted in order to ascertain the successful tender in accordance with the procedures and 
criteria set out in the invitation documents. 
(2) No criterion shall be used that has not been set out in the invitation documents. 
(3) The successful tender shall be: 
(a)  the tender with the lowest evaluated tender price; and 
(b) the lowest evaluated tender ascertained on the basis of criteria specified in 
the invitation documents which shall be 
 (i)  objective and quantifiable; and  
(ii)   given  relative  weight  in  the  evaluation  procedure  or  expressed  in  
monetary  terms  where  practicable  if  the  procurement  entity  has  so  
stipulated in the invitation documents. 
(4)   To   determine   the   lowest   evaluated   tender,   the   procurement   entity   shall   
consider 
(a) the tender price, subject to any margin of preference applied under section 
60(2) ; 
(b)  the  cost  of  operating,  maintaining  and  repairing  the  goods  or  works,  the  
time  for  delivery  of  the  goods,  completion  of  works  or  provisions  of  the  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
services,  the  functional  characteristics  of  the  goods  or  works,  the  terms  of  
payment and of guarantees in respect of the goods, works or services; 
(c)  the effect the acceptance of the tender will have on  
 (i)  the balance of payments position and foreign exchange reserves of 
the country;  
 (ii) the countertrade arrangements offered by suppliers or contractors;  
(iii)  the  extent  of  local  content,  including  manufacturer,  labour  and  
materials, in goods, works or services being offered by suppliers or 
contractors; 
  (iv)  the  economic-development  potential  offered  by  tenders,  including  
domestic investment or other business activity; 
   (v)   the   encouragement   of   employment,   the   reservation   of   certain   
production for domestic suppliers; 
 (vi) the transfer of technology;  
(vii)  the  development  of  managerial,  scientific  and  operational  skills;  
and 
(d)  national  security  considerations.  
Margin of preference 
60. (1)  A  procurement  entity  may  grant  a  margin  of  preference  for  the  benefit  of  
tenders  for  work  by  domestic  contractors  or  for  the  benefit  of  tenders  for  domestically  
produced goods or for the benefit of domestic suppliers of services. 
(2)   The   margin   of   preference   shall   be   calculated   in   accordance   with   the   
procurement regulations and reflected in the record of the procurement proceedings; 
(3)  The  margin  of  preference  shall  be  authorised  by  the  Board  and  be  subject  to  
approval by the Board. 
Multiple currency tender prices 
61. When  tender  prices  are  expressed  in  two  or  more  currencies,  the  tender  prices  of  
the total number of tenders shall be converted to the same currency according to the rate 
specified in the invitation documents for the evaluation and comparison tenders. 
Repeat tender qualifications 
62. (1)  The  procurement  entity  may  require  the  supplier  or  contractor  which  is  the  
successful tenderer, to demonstrate its qualifications again, whether or not it has engaged 
in pre-qualification proceedings in accordance with criteria and procedures that conform 
to section 23 on prequalification proceedings. 
(2) The criteria and procedures to be used for the further demonstration shall be set 
out in the tender documents. 
(3)  Where  pre-qualification  proceedings  have  been  used,  the  criteria  for  further  
demonstration shall be the same as those used in the pre-qualification proceedings. 
(4) If tenderers have not been pre-qualified, the entity shall determine whether the 
selected tenderer has the capacity to perform the contract effectively. 
(5)  The  criteria  to  be  met  shall  be  specified  in  the  tender  documents  and  if  the  
selected  tender  is  rejected,  the  procurement  entity  shall  make  a  similar  determination  of  
the next ranked best evaluated tender. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(6)  If  the  supplier  or  contractor  submitting  the  successful  tender  is  requested  to  
demonstrate its qualifications again but fails to do so, the procurement entity shall reject 
that  tender  and  shall  select  a  successful  tenderer,  in  accordance  with  section  59(4)  from  
among the remaining tenders, subject to the right of the procurement entity to reject the 
remaining tenders. 
Non-disclosure of tender evaluation details 
63. Information relating to the examination, clarification, evaluation and comparison of 
tenders  shall  not  be  disclosed  to  suppliers  or  contractors  or  to  any  other  person  not  
involved  officially  in  the  examination,  evaluation  or  comparison  of  tenders  or  in  the  
decision  on  which  tender  should  be  accepted,  except  as  provided  in  section  28  on  the  
record of procurement proceedings. 
Prohibition of negotiations with suppliers or contractors 
64. (1) Subject to the exception in this section, no negotiations shall take place between 
the procurement entity and a supplier or contractor with respect to a tender submitted by 
the supplier or contractor. 
(2) If the lowest evaluated responsive tender exceeds the budget for the contract by 
a substantial margin, the procurement entity shall investigate the causes for the excessive 
cost and may 
(a)  consider requesting new tenders; or   
(b)  subject  to  approval  by  the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board  and  guidelines  
issued by that Board, negotiate a contract with the lowest evaluated tenderer 
to try to obtain a satisfactory contract. 
Acceptance of tender and entry into force of procurement contract 
65. (1)  A  tender  that  has  been  ascertained  to  be  the  successful  tender  in  accordance  
with  this  Act  shall  be  accepted  and  notice  of  acceptance  of  the  tender  shall  be  given  
within 30 days of the acceptance of the tender to the supplier or contractor submitting the 
tender. 
(2)  Where  the  tender  documents  require  the  supplier  or  contractor  whose  tender  
has  been  accepted  to  sign  a  written  procurement  contract  conforming  to  the  tender,  the  
procurement  entity  and  the  supplier  or  contractor  shall  sign  the  procurement  contract  
within 30 days after the notice referred to in subsection (1) is despatched to the supplier 
or contractor. 
(3)  Where  a  written  procurement  contract  is  required  to  be  signed,  the  contract  
shall enter into force on the commencement date indicated on the contract. 
(4)  Between  the  time  when  the  notice  is  despatched  to  the  supplier  or  contractor  
and  the  entry  into  force  of  the  procurement  contract,  neither  the  procurement  entity  nor  
the supplier or contractor shall take any action that interferes with the entry into force of 
the procurement contract or with its performance. 
(5)  Except  as  provided  in  subsection  (2),  a  procurement  contract  in  accordance  
with the terms and conditions of the accepted tender enters into force when the notice is 
despatched to the supplier or contractor that submitted the tender, if it is despatched while 
the tender is in force. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(6)  The  notice  is  despatched  when  it  is  properly  addressed  or  otherwise  directed  
and transmitted to the supplier or contractor or conveyed to an appropriate authority for 
transmission to the supplier or contractor in a manner authorised in section 26. 
(7)  If  the  supplier  or  contractor  whose  tender  has  been  accepted  fails  to  sign  a  
written  procurement  contract  within  30  working  days  of  receipt  of  the  notice  of  
acceptance  or  fails  to  provide  the  required  security  for  the  performance  of  the  contract,  
the  procurement  entity  shall  select  a  successful  tender  in  accordance  with  section  59(3)  
from  among  the  remaining  tenders  that  are  in  force,  subject  to  the  right  of  the  
procurement entity to reject the remaining tenders. 
(8)  The  notice  provided  for  in  subsection  (1)  shall  be  given  to  the  supplier  or  
contractor that submitted the successful tender. 
(9)  A  procurement  entity  shall  give  notice  of  the  procurement  contract  in  writing  
to unsuccessful suppliers and contractors and the notice shall  
(a)  specify  the  name  and  address  of  the  successful  supplier  or  contractor  who  
has entered into the contract and the contract price; 
(b)  be  given  after  the  commencement  of  the  procurement  contract  and  may  
include  the  provision  by  the  supplier  or  contractor  of  security  for  the  
performance of the contract; 
(c)  for  contracts  above  the  threshold  in  Schedule  3,  be  published  in  the  
Procurement Bulletin which shall disclose the names of firms or individuals 
awarded  contracts,  the  start  and  completion  dates,  as  well  as  the  value  of  
the contracts. 
P
ART VI—METHODS AND PROCEDURES TO PROCURE CONSULTANTS 
Notice of invitation of expressions of interest and preparation of shortlists 
66. (1)  A  procurement  entity  shall  invite  consulting  services  by  causing  a  notice  
seeking  expression  of  interest  in  submitting  a  proposal  to  be  published  in  the  Public  
Procurement Bulletin for consultancy contracts above the threshold in Schedule 3. 
(2) The notice shall,  
(a)  contain  the  name  and  address  of  the  procurement  entity  and  a  brief  
description of the services to be procured; and 
(b)  be  published  in  English  and  in  a  newspaper  of  wide  circulation  or  in  a  
relevant  trade  or  professional  publication  of  wide  circulation  except  where  
participation is limited solely to national consultants under section 44 (1) or 
where  the  procurement  entity  decides  that  only  national  consultants  may  
submit proposals. 
(3)  Where  direct  invitation  is  necessary  for  economic  and  efficiency  reasons,  the  
procurement entity with the approval of the Board may apply the provisions of subsection 
(1) and (2) where 
(a)  the  services  to  be  procured  are  available  only  from  a  limited  number  of  
consultants, if it invites expressions of interest from all these consultants; 
(b)  the  time  and  cost  required  to  examine  and  evaluate  a  large  number  of  
expressions  of  interest  would  be  disproportionate  to  the  value  of  the  
services to be performed, if it invites proposals from enough consultants to 
ensure effective competition; or 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(c)  direct invitation is the only means to ensure confidentiality or is required in 
the  national  interest,  if  it  invites  enough  proposals  from  consultants  for  
effective competition. 
Shortlisted candidates 
67. (1)  The  procurement  entity  is  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  a  shortlist  of  
consultants to be considered to participate in the selection process. 
(2)  The  shortlist  may  comprise  only  national  consultants  but  shall  comprise  at  
least three and not more than six consultants. 
  (3)  The  procurement  entity  shall  provide  the  invitation  for  proposals  to  the  
shortlist of consultants selected on the basis of quality. 
(4)  The  procurement  entity  shall  provide  the  invitation  for  proposals  to  the  most  
qualified   or   single   sourced   consultant   selected   on   the   basis   of   the   consultant’s   
qualifications. 
Content of requests for proposals for consultancy services 
68. (1) The procurement entity shall use the standard invitation for proposals stipulated 
in Schedule 4 and any requirements for a specific assignment shall be introduced through 
information  to  consultants,  data  sheets  or  contract  data  sheets  and  not  by  introducing  
changes in the standard tender documents. 
(2) The invitation for proposals shall include  
(a)  the name and address of the procurement entity; 
(b)  the language or languages in which proposals are to be prepared; 
(c)  the manner, place and deadline for the submission of proposals; 
(d)  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  procurement  entity  reserves  the  right  to  
reject proposals; 
(e)  the criteria and procedures related to the evaluation of the qualifications of 
the  consultants  and  those  related  to  additional  qualifications  under  section  
24(5); 
(f)   the  requirements  on  documentary  evidence  or  other  information  that  shall  
be submitted by suppliers or contractors to demonstrate their qualifications; 
(g)  the  nature  and  required  characteristics  of  the  services  to  be  procured  
including  the  location  where  the  services  are  to  be  provided  and  the  time  
when the services are to be provided; 
(h)  whether  the  procurement  entity  is  seeking  proposals  on  various  possible  
ways of meeting its needs; 
(i)  the currency in which the proposal price is to be expressed; 
(j)   the  manner  in  which  the  proposal  price  is  to  be  expressed,  including  a  
statement  on  whether  the  price  covers  elements  apart  from  the  cost  of  
services,  such  as  reimbursement  for  transportation,  lodging,  insurance,  use  
of equipment, duties or taxes; 
(k)  the  procedure  selected  under  section  71(1)  to  ascertain  the  successful  
proposal; 
(l)   the  criteria  to  be  used  to  determine  the  successful  proposal,  including  any  
margin of preference to be used under section 57 and the relative weight of 
the criteria; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(m) the currency that will be used to evaluate and compare proposals and either 
the  exchange  rate  that  will  be  used  for  the  conversion  of    proposal  prices  
into  that  currency  or  a  statement  that  the  rate  published  by  a  specified  
financial institution prevailing on a specified date will be used; 
(n)  a statement on alternatives to the characteristics of the consultancy services, 
contractual  terms  and  conditions  or  other  requirements  set  out  in  the  
invitation  for  proposals  if  permitted  and  a  description  of  the  manner  in  
which the alternative proposals are to be evaluated and compared; 
(o) the name, functional title and address of one or more officers or employees 
of the procurement entity who are authorised to communicate directly with 
and to receive communications directly from consultants in connection with 
the procurement proceedings, without the intervention of an intermediary; 
(p) the means by which consultants may seek clarification on the invitation for 
proposals  and  a  statement  whether  the  procurement  entity  intends  to  
convene a meeting of consultants; and 
(q)  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  consultancy  contract  as  known  to  the  
procurement entity and the contract form to be signed by the parties. 
Criteria for the evaluation of proposals 
69. (1)  The  procurement  entity  shall  establish  criteria  to  evaluate  the  proposals  and  
determine  the  relative  weight  to  be  accorded  to  each  criterion  and  the  manner  in  which  
they are to be applied in the evaluation of proposals. 
(2) The consultants shall be notified of the criteria in the invitation for proposals 
and the criteria may deal with the following: 
(a)  the   qualifications,   experience,  reputation,  reliability  and  professional  and  
managerial  competence  of  the  consultant  and  the  personnel  to  be  involved  
in providing the services; 
(b)  the  effectiveness  of  the  proposals  submitted  by  the  consultants  in  meeting  
the needs of the procurement entity as specified in section 68(2)(g); 
(c)  the proposal price, including any ancillary or related costs; and 
(i)   the effect that the acceptance of a proposal will have on the balance 
of payments position and foreign exchange reserves of the country; 
(ii)  the extent of participation by nationals; 
(iii)   the   economic   development   potential   offered   by   the   proposal,   
including domestic investment or other business activity; 
(iv) the encouragement of employment; 
(v)  the transfer of technology; 
(vi) the development of managerial, scientific and operational skills;  
(vii) the counter-trade arrangements offered by consultants; and 
(d)  national  security  considerations.  
(3) A procurement entity may grant additional points for participation by nationals 
who  are  key  staff  in  foreign  and  national  firms,  and  these  points  shall  be  calculated  in  
accordance   with   the   procurement   regulations   and   reflected   in   the   record   of   the   
procurement proceedings subject to approval by the Board. 
Clarification and modification of invitation for proposals 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
70. (1)  A  consultant  may  request  clarification  of  the  invitation  for  proposals  from  the  
procurement entity and where such a request is made the procurement entity shall  
(a)  respond  to  the  request  within  7  working  days  of  the  request  being  made  if  
the  request  is  received  by  the  procurement  entity  within  14  working  days  
prior to the deadline for the submission of proposals; and 
(b)  where  the  request  is  made  later  than  14  days  prior  to  the  deadline  for  the  
submission of proposals, respond promptly and early enough to enable the 
consultant  make  a  timely  submission  of  its  proposal  and  shall,  without  
identifying the source of the invitation, communicate the clarification to the 
other   consultants   to   whom   the   procurement   entity   has   provided   the   
invitation for proposals. 
(2)  A  procurement  entity  may,  whether  on  its  initiative  or  as  a  result  of  a  request  
for clarification by a consultant, modify the request for proposals by issuing an addendum 
at any time prior to the deadline for the submission of proposals. 
(3)  The  addendum  shall  be  communicated  promptly  before  the  deadline  for  the  
submission  of  proposals  to  the  short-listed  consultants  to  whom  the  procurement  entity  
has provided the request for proposals and shall be binding on those consultants. 
(4)    If  the  procurement  entity  convenes  a  meeting  of  consultants,  it  shall  prepare  
minutes of the meeting containing the requests submitted at the meeting for clarification 
of  the  request  for  proposal  and  its  responses  to  those  requests,  without  identifying  the  
sources of the requests. 
(5) The minutes shall be provided promptly before the deadline for the submission 
of  proposals  to  the  consultants  participating  in  the  selection  proceedings  to  enable  them  
take the minutes into account in preparing their proposals. 
Choice of selection procedure 
71. (1) The procurement entity shall use the selection procedure provided for in section 
75(6)(a),  75(6)(b)  or  76  that  has  been  notified  to  consultants  in  the  invitation  for  
proposals. 
(2) The procurement entity shall include in the record required under section 28, a 
statement  of  the  grounds  and  circumstances  on  which  it  relied  to  justify  the  use  of  a  
selection procedure under subsection (1). 
(3) This Part does not prevent a procurement entity from resorting to an impartial 
panel of external experts in the selection procedure. 
Conditions for use of other methods of selection of consultants 
72. (1) A procurement entity may select consultants by quality-based selection for the 
following types of assignments: 
(a)  complex or highly specialised assignments, where  
(i)    it  is  difficult  to  define  precise  terms  of  reference  and  the  required  
input from the consultants;  
(ii)  the client expects the consultants to demonstrate innovation in their 
proposals; 
(b)  assignments  that  have  a  high  downstream  impact  where  the  objective  is  to  
have the best experts; and 
(c)  assignments  that  can  be  carried  out  in  substantially  different  ways  where  
proposals will not be comparable. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(2) A procurement entity may use selection under a fixed budget approved by the 
Board where the assignment is simple and can be precisely defined. 
(3)  A  procurement  entity  may  use  least-cost  selection  procedures  for  small  value  
assignments  subject  to  the  value  threshold  in  Schedule  3  where  the  assignment  is  of  a  
standard or routine nature and well-established practices and standards exist. 
(4)  A  procurement  entity  may  use  selection  based  on  consultants’  qualifications  
for very small value assignments subject to the value threshold in Schedule 3 where the 
need to prepare and evaluate competitive proposals is not justified. 
(5)  The  procurement  entity  may  select  consultants  by  inviting  proposals  from  a  
single consultant where there is  
(a)  only one eligible consultant; 
(b)  an emergency as specified in section 40(1)(b) and (c); or 
(c)  a follow-up assignment. 
Receipt of proposals 
73. (1)  The  procurement  entity  shall  allow  enough  time  for  the  consultants  to  prepare  
their proposals. 
(2) The time allowed shall depend on the nature of the assignment but shall not be 
less than four weeks. 
(3) To safeguard the integrity of the process, the technical and financial proposals 
shall be submitted in separate sealed envelopes. 
(4)  After  the  closing  time  for  the  submission  of  proposals,  the  appropriate  
committee of the procurement entity shall open the technical proposals immediately after 
the deadline for the submission of proposals. 
(5)  The  financial  proposals  shall  remain  sealed  until  they  are  opened  publicly  
under section 56. 
Evaluation of proposals 
74. (1)  The  evaluation  of  the  proposals  shall  be  carried  out  in  two  stages:  first  the  
quality, and then the cost. 
(2)  Evaluators  of  technical  proposals  should  not  have  access  to  the  financial  
proposals   until   the   technical   evaluation,   including   any   Tender   Board   Reviews   is   
concluded. 
(3)  The  evaluation  shall  be  carried  out  in  conformity  with  the  provisions  in  the  
invitation for proposals. 
Selection procedure where price is a factor 
75. (1)  Where  the  procurement  entity  uses  the  procedure  in  this  section,  it  shall  
establish a threshold on the quality and technical aspects of  the  proposals  in  accordance  
with  the  criteria  established  under  section  69  apart  from  those  set  out  in  the  request  for  
proposals  and  shall  rate  each  proposal  in  accordance  with  that  criteria  and  the  relative  
weight and manner of application of those criteria set out in the invitation for proposals. 
(2)  The  procurement  entity  shall  notify  the  consultants  whose  proposals  did  not  
meet the minimum qualifying mark or were non responsive to the invitation for proposals 
and terms of reference after the evaluation of quality is completed within a period of 14 
days after the decision has been taken by the procurement entity. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(3) The name of the consultant, the quality scores and the proposed prices shall be 
read aloud and recorded when the financial proposals are opened. 
(4) The procurement entity shall prepare the minutes of public opening of financial 
proposals which shall be part of the evaluation report and shall retain this record. 
(5)  The  procurement  entity  shall  compare  the  prices  of  the  proposals  that  have  
attained a rating at or above the threshold. 
(6) The successful proposals shall be 
(a)  the  proposals  with  the  best  combined  evaluation  in  terms  of  the  criteria  
established under section 69 apart from price in the case of quality and cost-
based selection; 
(b)  the proposals with the lowest price in the case of least-cost selection; or 
(c)  the consultants that submitted the highest ranked technical proposals within 
the budget; 
(7)  The  consultants  with  the  winning  proposals  shall  be  invited  for  negotiations,  
which shall focus mainly on the technical proposals. 
(8) Proposed unit rates for staff-months and reimbursables shall not be negotiated 
unless there are exceptional reasons. 
Selection procedure where price is not a factor 
76. (1) Where the procurement entity uses the quality-based selection, selection based 
on  consultant’s  qualifications  or  single-source  selection,  it  shall  engage  in  negotiations  
with consultants in accordance with this section. 
(2) The procurement entity shall  
(a)  establish a threshold in accordance with section 75(1); 
(b)  invite  for  negotiations  on  the  price  of  its  proposal,  the  consultant  that  has  
attained the best rating in accordance with section 75(1); 
(c)  inform  the  consultants  that  attained  ratings  above  the  threshold  that  they  
may  be  considered  for  negotiation  if  the  negotiations  with  the  consultant  
with the best rating do not result in a procurement contract; and 
(d)  inform  the  consultant  with  the  best  rating,  that  it  is  terminating  the  
negotiations  if  it  becomes  apparent  to  the  procurement  entity  that  the  
negotiations  with  that  consultant  invited  under  subsection  (2)(b),  will  not  
result in a procurement contract. 
(3) The procurement entity shall, if negotiations with the consultant with the best 
rating  fails,  invite  the  consultant  that  obtained  the  second  best  rating,  and  if  the  
negotiations with that consultant do not result in a procurement contract, the procurement 
entity shall invite the other consultants for negotiations on the basis of their rating until it 
arrives at a contract or rejects the remaining proposals.     
Confidentiality 
77. (1)  The  procurement  entity  shall  treat  proposals  and  any  negotiations  on  selection  
procedure  as  confidential  and  avoid  the  disclosure  of  their  contents  to  competing  
consultants. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(2)  A  party  to  the  negotiations  shall  not  reveal  to  any  other  person  any  technical,  
price  or  other  information  relating  to  the  negotiations  without  the  consent  of  the  other  
party. 
PART VII—REVIEW 
Right to review 
78. (1) Any supplier, contractor or consultant that claims to have suffered, or that may 
suffer loss or injury due to a breach of a duty imposed on the procurement entity by this 
Act, may seek review in accordance with this Part. 
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the following shall not be subject to the review 
(a)  the selection of a method of procurement under sections 35 to 43;  
(b)  the  choice  of  a  selection  procedure  under  section  75(6)(a),  75(6)(b)  or  
section 76; 
(c)  the  limitation  of  procurement  proceedings  in  accordance  with  section  44;  
and 
(d)  a  decision  by  the  procurement  entity  under  section  29  to  reject  tenders,  
proposals, offers or quotation. 
Review by procurement entity 
79. (1)  A  complaint  shall,  in  the  first  instance,  be  submitted  in  writing  to  the  head  of  
the procurement entity if the procurement contract has not already entered into force. 
(2) The head of the procurement entity shall not entertain a complaint unless it was 
submitted  within  twenty  days  after  the  supplier,  contractor  or  consultant  submitting  it  
became  aware  of  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the  complaint  or  when  that  supplier,  
contractor, or consultant should have become aware of those circumstances, whichever is 
earlier. 
(3)  The  head  of  the  procurement  entity  may  entertain  a  complaint  or  continue  to  
entertain    a    complaint    after    the    procurement    contract    has    entered    into    force    
notwithstanding subsection (1). 
(4) A procurement entity shall attempt to resolve a complaint by mutual agreement 
of the supplier or contractor and the procurement entity. 
(5)  The  head  of  the  procurement  entity  shall,  within  twenty-one  days  after  the  
submission of the complaint, issue a written decision. 
(6) The decision shall  
(a)  state the reasons for the decision; and 
(b)  if  the  complaint  is  upheld  in  whole  or  in  part,  indicate  the  corrective  
measures that are to be taken. 
(7)  If  the  head  of  the  procurement  entity  does  not  issue  a  decision  by  the  time  
specified   in   subsection   (5),   the   supplier,   contractor,   or   consultant,   submitting   the   
complaint is entitled to institute proceedings for administrative review under section 80. 
(8)  After  the  institution  of  the  proceedings,  the  competence  of  the  head  of  the  
procuring entity to entertain the complaint ceases. 
Administrative review 
80. (1)  A  supplier,  contractor  or  consultant  entitled  to  seek  review  may  submit  a  
complaint to the Board, 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
 (a) within twenty-one days after  
(i)   the   supplier,   contractor   or   consultant   became   aware   of   the   
circumstances giving rise to the complaint; or   
(ii)   the  time  when  the  supplier,  contractor  or  consultant  ought  to  have  
become aware of those circumstances, 
if the complaint cannot be submitted under section 79 because of the entry 
into force of the procurement contract; 
(b)  if  the  head  of  the  procurement  entity  does  not  entertain  the  complaint  
because the procurement contract has entered into force, and the complaint 
is submitted within twenty-one days after the issuance of the decision not to 
entertain the complaint; 
(c)  under  section  79(7)    if  the  complaint  is  submitted  within  twenty-one  days  
after the expiry of the period referred to in section 79(5); or 
(d)  if the supplier, contractor, or consultant claims to be adversely affected by a 
decision  of  the  head  of  the  procurement  entity  under  section  79,  and  the  
complaint is submitted within twenty days after the issue of the decision. 
(2)  Upon  receipt  of  a  complaint,  the  Board  shall  give  notice  of  the  complaint  
promptly to the procurement entity. 
(3) The Board may, 
(a)  declare  the  legal  rules  or  principles  that  govern  the  subject-matter  of  the  
complaint; 
(b)  order that the provisions of this Act be complied with; 
(c)  require  the  procurement  entity  that  has  acted  or  proceeded  in  an  illegal  
manner,  or  that  has  reached  an  illegal  decision,  to  act  or  to  proceed  in  a  
legal manner or to reach a legal decision; 
(d)  annul  in  whole  or  in  part  an  illegal  act  or  decision  of  the  procurement  
entity, other than any act or decision bringing the procurement contract into 
force; 
(e)  revise  an  illegal  decision  by  the  procurement  entity  or  substitute  its  own  
decision for the decision, other than any decision bringing the procurement 
contract into force; 
(f)   require  the  payment  of  compensation  for  reasonable  costs  incurred  by  the  
supplier or contractor who submitted the complaint, in connection with the 
procurement proceedings as a result of an illegal decision of, or procedure 
followed by the procurement entity; 
(g)  order that the procurement proceedings be terminated; 
(h)   dismiss   the   complaint   and   require   the   payment   of   compensation   for   
reasonable costs incurred by the Procurement Entity or the Board. 
(4)  The  Board  shall,  within  twenty-one  days  of  starting  a  review,  issue  a  written  
decision concerning the complaint, stating the reasons for the decision. 
(5) Correspondence pertaining to any complaint shall be copied to the Board. 
Certain rules applicable to review proceedings  
81. (1)  The  head  of  the  procurement  entity  or  the  Board  shall  notify  the  suppliers,  
contractors, or consultants participating in procurement proceedings about the submission 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
of  a  complaint  and  of  its  substance  within  14  working  days  after  the  submission  of  the  
complaint for review. 
(2)  A  supplier  or  contractor  or  any  government  authority  whose  interests  are  or  
could  be  affected  by  the  review  proceedings  is  entitled  to  participate  in  the  review  
proceedings. 
(3)  A  supplier,  contractor,  or  consultant  who  fails  to  participate  in  the  review  
proceedings is barred from subsequently making the same type of claim. 
(4)  A  copy  of  the  decision  of  the  head  of  the  procurement  entity  or  of  the  Board  
shall  be  furnished  within  five  days  after  the  issue  of  the  decision  to  the  supplier,  
contractor,  or  consultant  submitting  the  complaint  to  the  procurement  entity  and  to  any  
other  supplier,  contractor  or  government  authority  that  has  participated  in  the  review  
proceedings. 
(5)  After  the  decision  has  been  taken,  the  complaint  and  the  decision  shall  be  
promptly made available for inspection by the general public, but no information shall be 
disclosed  if  its  disclosure  would  be  contrary  to  law,  would  impede  law  enforcement,  
would not be in the public interest, would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of the 
parties or would inhibit fair competition. 
Suspension of procurement proceedings 
82. (1)  Where  review  proceedings  are  initiated,  the  procurement  proceedings  may  be  
suspended for 7 days if the complaint  
(a)  is not frivolous;  
(b)  contains  a  declaration  which  demonstrates  that  the  supplier,  contractor  or  
consultant  will  suffer  irreparable  damage  if  the  suspension  is  not  granted;  
and  
(d)  is likely to succeed  
and the grant of the suspension will not cause disproportionate harm to the procurement 
entity or to other suppliers, contractors, or consultants. 
(2)  When  the  procurement  contract  enters  into  force,  upon  the  submission  of  a  
complaint under section 79, performance of the procurement contract shall be suspended 
for seven days, if the complaint meets the requirements set out in subsection (1). 
(3)  The  head  of  the  procurement  entity  and  the  Board  under  subsection  (2)  may  
extend  the  suspension  in  order  to  preserve  the  rights  of  the  supplier,  contractor,  or  
consultant who is a party to the review pending the disposition of the review proceedings, 
but the total period of suspension shall not exceed thirty days. 
(4) The suspension provided for by this section shall not apply if the procurement 
entity  certifies  that  urgent  public  interest  considerations  requires  the  procurement  to  
proceed.  
(5)   The   certification   shall   state   the   grounds   for   the   finding   that   urgent   
considerations   exist   and   shall   be   made   a   part   of   the   record   of   the   procurement   
proceedings, and it is conclusive with respect to administrative review.  
(6) Any decision by the procurement entity under this section and the grounds and 
circumstances shall be made part of the record of the procurement proceedings. 
    P
ART VIII—DISPOSAL OF STORES, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
Authority to dispose 
83. (1) The head of a procurement entity shall convene a Board of Survey comprising 
representatives  of  departments  with  unserviceable,  obsolete  or  surplus  stores,  plant  and  
equipment  which  shall  report  on  the  items  and  subject  to  a  technical  report  on  them,  
recommend the best method of disposal after the officer in charge has completed a Board 
of Survey form. 
(2) The Board of Survey’s recommendations shall be approved by the head of the 
procurement entity and the items shall be disposed of as approved. 
(3)  Where  items  become  unserviceable  for  reasons  other  than  fair  wear  and  tear,  
such as through accident or expiry, a set procedure established by the Board for handling 
losses shall be followed before the items are boarded and disposed of. 
Disposal procedures 
84. Disposal of obsolete and surplus items shall be by  
(a) transfer to government departments or other public entities, with or without 
financial adjustment; 
(b)  sale by public tender to the highest tenderer, subject to reserve price; 
(c)  sale by public auction, subject to a reserve price; or 
(d)  destruction,  dumping,  or burying as appropriate. 
P
ART IX—MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Instructions and guidelines for disposal of unserviceable stores 
85. (1)  The  Minister  shall  make  further  regulations  on  the  disposal  of  unserviceable  
stores and obsolete equipment. 
(2) The Board shall issue detailed instructions and policy guidelines  relating to the 
disposal of unserviceable stores and equipment. 
Code of conduct 
86. The  Board  shall  compile  and  publish  a  code  of  conduct  with  the  approval  of  the  
Minister which shall apply to every official of a procurement entity, the Board, members 
of Tender Review Boards,  as well as suppliers, contractors and consultants. 
Modifications 
87. (1) Except in cases of extreme urgency, where there will be an aggregate increase 
in  the  original  amount  of  the  contract  by  more  than  10  percent  of  the  original  price,  a  
procurement  entity  shall  inform  the  appropriate  Tender  Review  Boards  in  the  case  of  a  
contract  subject  to  review  by  the  Tender  Review  Board  of  any  proposed  extension,  
modification or variation order with reasons. 
(2) In the case of contracts which are not originally subject to review by a Tender 
Review  Board,  any  proposed  modification  of  contract  which  will  make  the  revised  
contract   price   exceed   the   procurement   method   threshold   or   the   threshold   of   the   
procurement entity shall be cleared with the appropriate Tender Review Board. 
Request for information by the Board 
88. Every  procurement  entity  shall  provide  the  Board  with  such  information  as  the  
Board  may  require  in  writing,  regarding  procurement  engaged  in  by  the  procurement  
entity. 
Investigation by the Board 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
89. (1)  The  Board  may  appoint  a  person  to  conduct  an  investigation  into  any  matter  
related  to  the  conduct  of  procurement  proceedings  by  a  procurement  entity,  or  the  
conclusion  or  operation  of  a  procurement  contract  if  it  considers  that  an  investigation  is  
necessary or desirable to prevent, or detect a contravention of this Act. 
(2) An investigator may, subject to subsection (3), 
(a)  at  any  time  during  normal  office  hours,  without  previous  notice,  enter  the  
premises   of   the   procurement   entity   tenderer,   supplier,   contractor,   or   
consultant     concerned     with     the     procurement     proceedings     under     
investigation; 
(b) require an officer, employee or agent of the procurement entity or tenderer, 
supplier,  contractor,  or  consultant  to  produce  any  books,  records,  accounts  
or documents; 
(c)  search premises for any books, records, accounts or documents; 
(d)  examine and make extracts from and copies of books, records, accounts or 
documents  of  the  procurement  entity,  tenderer,  supplier,  contractor  or  
consultant; 
(e)  remove  books,  records,  accounts  or  documents  of  the  procurement  entity,  
tenderer, supplier, contractor or consultant for as long as may be necessary 
to  examine  them  or  make  extracts  from  or  copies  of  them,  but  the  
investigator shall give a detailed receipt for the books, records, accounts or 
documents removed; 
(f)  require an officer, employee or agent of the procurement entity or tenderer, 
supplier, or contractor or consultant, 
(i)   to explain an entry in the books, records, accounts or documents; 
(ii)   to   provide   the   investigator   with   information   concerning   the   
management  or  activities  of  the  procurement  entity  or  tenderers  as  
may be reasonably required. 
(3)  The  powers  of  entry  and  search  conferred  by  subsection  (2)(a)  and  (c)  of  this  
section  shall  not  be  exercised  except  with  the  consent  of  the  procurement  entity  or  
tenderer,  supplier,  contractor,  or  consultant  concerned  or  of  the  person  in  charge  of  the  
premises  unless  there  are  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  it  is  necessary  to  exercise  
those  powers  for  the  prevention,  investigation  or  detection  of  an  offence  or  to  obtain  
evidence relating to an offence. 
(4) Any person who, without just cause, hinders or obstructs an investigator in the 
exercise  of  a  function  under  this  section  commits  an  offence  and  is  liable  on  summary  
conviction  to  a  fine  not  exceeding  500  penalty  units  or  a  term  of  imprisonment  not  
exceeding two years or to both. 
Procedures on completion of investigation 
89. (1) An investigator shall 
  (a)  forward a copy of the investigation report to the Board; and 
(b)  send  a  summary  of  the  findings  and  recommendations  to  the  procurement  
entity and to any tenderer, supplier, contractor or consultant whose conduct 
was the subject of the investigation. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(2) The Board shall, if satisfied that there has been a contravention of this Act or 
any  other  law  in  relation  to  procurement  proceedings  or  procurement  contracts,  take  
action to rectify the contravention which action shall include 
(a)  annulment of the procurement proceedings; 
(b)  cancellation of the procurement contract; 
(c)  ratification of anything done in relation to the proceedings; or 
(d)  a declaration consistent with any relevant provisions of this Act. 
(3) The Board shall afford a person adequate opportunity to make representations 
in  a  matter,  before  taking  any  action  in  terms  of  subsection  (2)  which  may  adversely  
affect the rights or property of that person. 
Statutory audits 
91. (1) The  Auditor-General  shall  conduct  annual  audits  of  the  procurement  activities  
of entities and shall furnish copies of reports on the audits to the Board upon request from 
the Board. 
(2)  The  Auditor-General  shall  also  carry  out  specific  audits  into  the  procurement  
activities  of  entities  and  compliance  by  contractors,  suppliers  and  consultants  with  the  
procurement requirements in this Act and regulations made under this Act at the request 
of the Board. 
(3) The statutory audit of procurement activities may be relied upon by the Board 
to institute measures to improve the procurement system. 
Offences relating to procurement 
92. (1) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act commits an offence and 
where  no  penalty  has  been  provided  for  the  offence,  the  person  is  liable  on  summary  
conviction  to  a  fine  not  exceeding  1000  penalty  units  or  a  term  of  imprisonment  not  
exceeding five years or to both. 
(2) The following shall also constitute offences under this Act: 
(a)   entering   or   attempting   to   enter   into   a   collusive   agreement,   whether   
enforceable  or  not,  with  any  other  supplier  or  contractor  where  the  prices  
quoted  in  their  respective  tenders,  proposals  or  quotations  are  or  would  be  
higher than would have been the case has there not been collusion between 
the persons concerned; 
(b)  directly  or  indirectly  influencing  in  any  manner  or  attempting  to  influence  
in any manner the procurement process to obtain an unfair advantage in the 
award of a procurement contract; 
(c)  altering any procurement document with intent to influence the outcome of 
a tender proceeding and this includes but is not limited to 
 (i)  forged arithmetical correction; 
(ii)  insertion  of  documents  such  as  bid  security  or  tax  clearance  
certificate which were not submitted at bid opening; and 
(d)  request for clarification in a manner not permitted under this Act. 
Corrupt Practices 
93.   (1)   Entities   and   participants   in   a   procurement   process   shall,   in   undertaking   
procurement activities, abide by the provisions of article 284 of the Constitution. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(2)  An  act  amounts  to  a  corrupt  practice  if  so  construed  within  the  meaning  of  
corruption as defined in the Criminal Code, 1960 (Act 29). 
Review of threshold levels 
94. The  threshold  levels  specified  in  Schedule  3  shall  be  reviewed  by  the  Board  and  
presented by the Minister for the approval of Parliament. 
Public access to legal texts 
95. The  Chief  Executive  of  the  Board  shall  ensure  that  administrative  rulings  and  
directives of general application under this Act are promptly made available to the public. 
International obligations 
96.   Notwithstanding   the   extent   of   the   application   of   this   Act   to   procurement,   
procurement  with  international  obligations  arising  from  any  grant  or  concessionary  loan  
to the government shall be in accordance with the terms of the grant or loan. 
Regulations 
97. (1)  The  Minister,  in  consultation  with  the  Board,  may  make  regulations  by  
legislative instrument to give effect to the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In furtherance of subsection (1), the Minister may make regulations 
(a)  on the preparation and submission of tenders; 
(b)  to  provide  for  the  manner  of  publication  of  the  notice  of  procurement  
contract awards; 
(c)  on the margin of preference in the evaluation of tenders; 
(d)  on the preparation and submission of applications to prequalify for a tender; 
(e)  on procurement proceedings on the basis of nationality; 
(f)  on the procurement process where one entity or a specially appointed agent 
is to procure items on behalf of another entity; 
(g)  on the disposal of unserviceable stores and obsolete equipment; 
(h)  to amend the schedules to this Act; and 
(i)  on any other matter connected with public procurement. 
(3)  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  in  any  enactment,  a  person  who  
contravenes any regulation made under this Act is liable on summary conviction to a fine 
not exceeding 1000 penalty units or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or 
to both. 
Interpretation 
98. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, 
“  Board”  means  the  Public  Procurement  Board  established  under  section  1  of  
this Act; 
“Catastrophic event” means a disaster of a national proportion; 
“central management agencies” means the Public Services Commission, Office 
of the President and Office of the Head of Civil Service; 
“CEO” means chief executive officer; 
“confirmer”  in  relation  to  security  means  a  person  who  or  a  bank  which  
confirms letters of credit or bills; 
“consultancy services” means services which are of an intellectual and advisory 
nature  provided  by  firms  or  individuals  using  their  professional  skills  to  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
study, design and organise specific projects, advise clients, conduct training 
or transfer knowledge; 
“consultant”  means  a  person,  natural  or  corporate,  dealing  in  the  provision  of  
services including consultancy services; 
“currency” includes monetary unit of account; 
“entity” means procurement entity; 
“a  domestic  supplier”  means  a  citizen  who  is  a  supplier  or  a  corporate  body  
with a majority shareholding owned by citizens which is a supplier; 
 “goods” means objects of every kind and description including raw materials, 
products  and  equipment  and  objects  in  solid,  liquid  or  gaseous  form,  and  
electricity,  as  well  as  services  incidental  to  the  supply  of  the  goods  if  the  
value  of  those  incidental  services  does  not  exceed  that  of  the  goods  
themselves; 
“governance  institutions”  includes  Regional  Co-ordinating  Councils,  District  
Assemblies, Metropolitan and Municipal Assemblies; 
 “head of entity” means in relation to 
   (i)   the   central   management   agencies   and   Ministries,   the   sector   
Minister; 
   (ii)   subvented   agencies,   the   Director–General,   Executive   Director,   
Secretary or Chief Executive; 
(iii) the Regional Co-ordinating Councils, the Regional Minister; 
(iv) the District Assemblies, the District Chief Executive; 
 (v)  State Owned Enterprises, the sector Minister; 
“key staff” means important professional staff but excludes support staff; 
“Least  Cost  Selection  (LCS)”  means  a  competitive  method  where  quality  and  
cost are taken into account but the firm offering the least cost is considered; 
“local content” means a product originating from Ghana; 
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for Finance; 
“national  interest”  means  a  condition  where  the  nation  attaches  high  value,  
returns, benefit and consideration to the matter in question; 
“national  security”  means  a  condition  where  security  takes  priority  over  
economic consideration and efficiency; 
“one  stop  only”  means  .in  relation  to  the  operating  threshold  the  procurement  
entity  seeks,  concurrent  approval  for  a  contract  award  from  one  tender  
review board only.  
“performance  security”  means  a  security  guaranteeing  the  performance  of  a  
contract; 
“procurement  contract”  means  a  contract  between  the  procuring  entity  and  a  
supplier, contractor or consultant resulting from procurement proceedings; 
  “procurement  entity”  means  any  entity  conducting  public  procurement  under  
this Act; 
“procurement  unit”  means  the  person  or  unit  in  the  procurement  entity  that  is  
dedicated   to   providing   technical   procurement   services   for   the   tender   
committee; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
“professional body” means a body comprising members of a profession which 
is  registered  under  the  Professional  Bodies  Registration  Decree,  1973  
(N.R.C.D. 143) or under any other enactment; 
“public funds” include the Consolidated Fund, the Contingency Fund and such 
other public funds as may be established by Parliament; 
“Quality  Cost  Based  Selection  (QCBS)”  means  a  competitive  method  of  
combining quality and cost of services in the selection of a firm taking into 
consideration 
(a)  the  relative  weight  to  be  given  to  quality  and  the  cost  to  be  
determined in each case depending on the nature of the assignment, 
(b)   the  total  score  to  be  obtained  by  weighing  the  quality  and  the  cost  
score  and  adding  them  together,  where  the  weight  assigned  to  the  
quality and price is determined by the relative importance of quality 
in the assignment; 
“security”  means  an  amount  to  secure  the  fulfillment  of  any  obligation  of  a  
contractor,  supplier  or  consultant,  which  may  take  the  form  of  a  financial  
deposit, a surety bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit; 
“selection procedure where price is not a factor” means selection which is made 
on technical quality only and where price is negotiated later; 
“service”  means  the  furnishing  of  labour,  time,  or  effort  not  involving  the  
delivery  of  a  specific  end  product  other  than  reports,  which  are  merely  
incidental    to    the    required    performance;    and    includes    consulting,    
professional   and   technical   services  but  does  not  include  employment  
agreements or collective bargaining agreements; 
“subvented agency” means an agency set up by Government to provide public 
service  and  financed  from  public  funds  allocated  by  Parliament  in  the  
annual appropriation; 
   “supplier   or   contractor”   means   any   potential   party   or   the   party   to   a   
procurement contract with the procuring entity; 
“technical  services”  means  services  which  are  tendered  and  contracted  on  the  
basis  of  performance  of  a  measurable  physical  output  such  as  drilling,  
mapping,  aerial  photography,  surveys,  seismic  investigations,  maintenance  
of facilities or plant and similar operations; 
“Tender  Committee”  means  the  body  within  an  entity  with  responsibility  for  
planning,  processing,  and  generally  taking  procurement  decisions  and  
ensuring compliance with the public procurement law, among others; 
“tenderer” means a person who puts in a bid in a procurement contract; 
“tender  security”  means  security  provided  to  the  procurement  entity  to  secure  
the  fulfillment  of  an  obligation  under  this  Act  and  includes  arrangements  
such as bank guarantees, surety bonds, stand-by letters of credit, cheques on 
which a bank is primarily liable, cash deposits and bills of exchange; 
“works”   means   work   associated   with   the   construction,   reconstruction,   
demolition,  repair  or  renovation  of  a  building  or  structure  or  surface  and  
includes  site  preparation,  excavation,  erection,  assembly,  installation  of  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
plant,  fixing  of  equipment  and  laying  out  of  materials,  decoration  and  
finishing, and any incidental activity under a procurement contract. 
Repeal and savings 
99. (1) The following enactments are hereby revoked or repealed as appropriate:  
(a)  The District Tender Board Regulations, 1995 (L.I. 1606);   
(b)  the Ghana National Procurement Agency Decree, 1976 (S.M.C.D. 55); and 
(c)  the Ghana Supply Commission Law, 1990 (P.N.D.C.L. 245). 
(2)   Notwithstanding   the   revocation   and   repeal   of   the   enactments   stated   in   
subsection  (1),  any  contracts,  orders,  decisions  or  anything  made  or  done  by  a  body  
which, until the coming into force of this Act, was charged with the performance of any 
of the functions under this Act shall, be valid and continue to be in force as if it was made 
or done under this Act. 
(3)  Where  in  the  view  of  the  Board  the  continued  validity  of  an  act  under  
subsection (2) is inconsistent with this Act, the Board may take the appropriate decision 
to rectify the inconsistency to the extent consistent with this Act. 
(4)  Notwithstanding  the  coming  into  force  of  this  Act,  Tender  Boards,  and  
Committees  which  immediately  before  the  coming  into  force  of  this  Act  performed  the  
functions  of  Award  Authorities  as  envisaged  under  this  Act  shall  continue  in  existence  
until they are reconstituted or otherwise replaced under this Act. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
 
SCHEDULE 1 
(Section 17) 
ENTITY TENDER COMMITTEES 
1.      Tender   Committee   for   Central   Management   Agency/   Ministry/Subvented   
Agency 
(1)  Chairperson A Minister,  Chief  Executive  Officer  or  Head  of  Agency  
to be appointed by the President 
(2)  Members (a)  head of finance or head of accounts division;  
 (b)  a representative of the Ministry of Justice not below 
Chief State Attorney; 
 (c)   three  other  heads  of  division  or  department  one  of  
whom represents a user department or division. 
  (d)   two  members  of  Parliament  from  the  region,  one  
appointed  by  the  Minister  and  the  other  chosen  by  
the Regional Caucus of Members of Parliament. 
 (3)  Secretary The officer heading the procurement unit or department 
 (4)  Quorum The  quorum  of  the  Tender  Committee  shall  be  five  
members,  including  the  chairperson  and  members  
shall  not  delegate  their  responsibility  to  any  other  
person. 
(5)  Voting                      Decisions shall be made by simple majority and the 
chairperson shall have a casting vote. 
(6)  Functions The Committee shall 
 (a)  review  procurement  plans  in  order  to  ensure  that  
they  support  the  objectives  and  operations  of  the  
entity; 
 (b)  confirm the range of acceptable costs of items to be 
procured and match these with the available funds in 
the entity’s approved budget, 
 (c)   review     the     schedules     of     procurement     and     
specifications  and  also  ensure  that  the  procurement  
procedures  to  be  followed  are  in  strict  conformity  
with   the   provisions   of   this   Act,   its   operating   
regulations and guidelines; 
                            (d)   ensure  that  the  necessary  concurrent  approval  is  
secured  from  the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board,  in  
terms  of  the  applicable  threshold  in  Schedule  3  of  
this Act, prior to the award of the contract; 
 (e)     facilitate     contract     administration     and     ensure     
compliance  with  all  reporting    requirements  under  
this Act; and      

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
 (f)   ensure that stores and equipment are     disposed of 
in compliance with this Act. 
2.   Tender Committee for Regional Co-ordinating Council 
(1)  Chairperson The Regional Minister   
(2)  Members (a)  the Director of Finance; and  
 (b)  a representative of the Ministry of Justice not below 
Senior State Attorney;  
 (c)  four heads of Departments, one of whom represents 
the user department/agency.   
(3)  Member Secretary The Regional Co-ordinating Director 
(4)  Quorum The  quorum  of  the  Tender  Committee  shall  be  four  
members,  including  the  chairperson  and  members  
shall  not  delegate  their  responsibility  to  any  other  
person 
(5)  Voting                        Decisions  shall  be  made  by  simple  majority  and  the  
chairperson shall have a casting vote. 
(6)  Functions The Committee shall 
 (a)  review  procurement  plans  in  order  to  ensure  that  
they  support  the  policies  and  programmes  of  the  
Regional Administration or District, Metropolitan or  
Municipal Assembly;  
 (b)  confirm the range of acceptable costs  of items to be 
procured and match these with the available funds in 
the approved budget of the Regional Administration 
or District, Metropolitan or Municipal Assembly; 
. (c)   review     the     schedules     of     procurement     and     
specifications  and  also  ensure  that  the  procurement  
procedures  to  be  followed  are  in  strict  conformity  
with   the   provisions   of   this   Act,   its   operating   
regulations and guidelines;  
 (d)  ensure  that  the  necessary  concurrent  approval  is  
secured  from  the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board,  in  
terms  of  the  applicable  threshold  in  Schedule  3  of  
this Act, prior to the award of the contract; 
 (e)     facilitate     contract     administration     and     ensure     
compliance  with  all  reporting  requirements  under  
this Act; and 
 (f)    ensure  that  stores  and  equipment  are  disposed  of  in  
compliance with this Act. 
3.  Metropolitan/Municipal/District Tender Committee
 
(1)  Chairperson the Metropolitan, Municipal or District Chief Executive 
(2)  Members (a) the Director of Finance; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
 (b)   a  lawyer  appointed  by  the  Metropolitan,  Municipal  
or District Assembly; 
 (c)   one Member of Parliament; and 
 (d)  three heads of Departments one of whom represents 
the user department or agency. 
(3)  Member Secretary         Co-ordinating         Director         
(4)  Quorum  The  quorum  of  the  Tender  Committee  shall  be  four  
members,  including  the  chairperson  and  members  
shall  not  delegate  their  responsibility  to  any  other  
person. 
(5)  Voting  Decisions  shall  be  made  by  simple  majority  and  the  
chairperson shall have a casting vote. 
(6)  Functions The Committee shall 
 (a)  review  procurement  plans  in  order  to  ensure  that  
they  support  the  policies  and  programmes  of  the  
Assembly; 
 (b)  confirm the range of acceptable costs of items to be 
procured and match these with the available funds in 
the approved budget of the Assembly; 
 (c)   review     the     schedules     of     procurement     and     
specifications  and  also  ensure  that  the  procurement  
procedures  to  be  followed  are  in  strict  conformity  
with   the   provisions   of   this   Act,   its   operating   
regulations and guidelines; 
 (d)   ensure  that  the  necessary  approval  is  secured  from  
the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board,  in  terms  of  the  
applicable threshold in Schedule 3 of this Act, prior 
to the award of the contract; 
 (e)     facilitate     contract     administration     and     ensure     
compliance  with  all  reporting  requirements  under  
this Act; 
 (f)    ensure  that  stores  and  equipment  are  disposed  of  in  
compliance with this Act. 
4.  State Enterprises Tender Committee
 
(1)  Chairperson the sector Minister or Chairman of the Board 
(2)  Members (a) the Chief Executive;     
 (b)  the Financial Controller; 
 (c)   the head of Technical Services; 
 (d)   representative  of  the  Ministry  of  Justice  not  below  
Senior State Attorney; 
 (e)   two members of the Board; and 
 (f)   three   heads   of   Departments   appointed   by   the   
Minister. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(3)  Secretary the head of procurement 
(4)  Quorum Five  
(5)  Voting Decisions    shall    be    by    simple    majority    and    the    
chairperson shall have a casting vote. 
(6)  Functions The Committee shall 
 (a)  review  procurement  plans  in  order  to  ensure  that  
they  support  the  objectives  and  operations  of  the  
Entity; 
 (b)  confirm the range of acceptable costs of items to be 
procured and match these with the available funds in 
the entity’s approved budget; 
 (c)   review     the     schedules     of     procurement     and     
specifications  and  also  ensure  that  the  procurement  
procedures  to  be  followed  are  in  strict  conformity  
with   the   provisions   of   this   Act,   its   operating   
regulations and guidelines;  
 (d)  ensure  that  the  necessary  concurrent  approval  is  
secured  from  the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board,  in  
terms  of  the  applicable  threshold  in  Schedule  3  of  
this Act, prior to the award of the contract. 
              (e)      facilitate     contract     administration     and     ensure     
compliance  with  all  reporting  requirements  under  
this Act; and 
 (f)    ensure  that  stores  and  equipment  are  disposed  of  in  
compliance with this Act. 
5.  Tertiary Institutions Tender Committee
 
(1)  Chairperson Chairperson of Council 
(2)  Members (a) the Registrar; 
 (b)  the  Finance  Officer;  
 (c)   a lawyer appointed by the Council;      
 (d)    one    member    nominated    by    the    Development    
Committee; 
 (e)   one member appointed by the Ministry of Education; 
 (f)    one  member  appointed  by  the  National  Council  on  
Tertiary Education (NCTE); 
                                                (g)  one  representative  of  the  students’  Representative  
Council (SRC); and 
                                                (h)   one  representative  from  an  association  of  university  
teachers.  
(3)  Secretary the Senior Assistant Registrar with responsibility for the 
General Services schedule 
(4)  Quorum Five  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(5)  Voting            Decisions    shall    be    by    simple    majority    and    the    
chairperson shall have a casting vote. 
(6)  Functions The Committee shall 
 (a)  review  procurement  plans  in  order  to  ensure  that  
they  support  the  objectives  and  operations  of  the  
Institution, Faculty, Department or Entity; 
 (b)  confirm the range of acceptable costs of items to be 
procured and match these with the available funds in 
the approved budget; 
 (c)   review     the     schedules     of     procurement     and     
specifications  and  also  ensure  that  the  procurement  
procedures  to  be  followed  are  in  strict  conformity  
with   the   provisions   of   this   Act,   its   operating   
regulations and guidelines;  
 (d)  ensure  that  the  necessary  concurrent  approval  is  
secured  from  the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board,  in  
terms  of  the  applicable  threshold  in  Schedule  3  of  
this Act, prior to the award of the contract; 
 (e)        facilitate    contract    administration    and    ensure    
compliance  with  all  reporting  requirements  under  
this Act; and 
 (f)    ensure  that  stores  and  equipment  are  disposed  of  in  
compliance with this Act. 
6.  College /School Tender Committee
   
(1)  Chairperson Chairman of Board of Governors    
(2)  Members (a)  Principal, Headmaster or Headmistress; 
 (b)  the Bursar or Finance officer;    
 (c)   two members of the governing board; 
 (d)  a lawyer appointed by the governing board; 
 (e)   two  heads  of  department  one  being  the  beneficiary  
department. 
(3)  Secretary Secretary to the governing board 
(4)  Quorum                           Five                            
(5)  Voting                     Decisions shall be by simple majority and the chairperson 
shall have a casting vote. 
(6)  Functions The Committee shall 
                                                (a)  review  procurement  plans  in  order  to  ensure  that  
they  support  the  objectives  and  operations  of  the  
Institution or Entity; 
 (b)  confirm the range of acceptable costs of items to be 
procured and match these with the available funds in 
the approved budget; 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
 (c)   review     the     schedules     of     procurement     and     
specifications  and  also  ensure  that  the  procurement  
procedures  to  be  followed  are  in  strict  conformity  
with   the   provisions   of   this   Act,   its   operating   
regulations and guidelines;  
 (d)    ensure  that  the  necessary  concurrent  approval  is  
secured  from  the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board,  in  
terms  of  the  applicable  threshold  in  Schedule  3  of  
this Act, prior to the award of the contract; 
 (e)      facilitate     contract     administration     and     ensure     
compliance  with  all  reporting  requirements  under  
this Act; and 
 (f)     ensure  that  stores  and  equipment  are  disposed  of  in  
compliance with this Act. 
7.  Hospital/Health Institution Tender Committee
 
(1)  Chairperson     Minister for Health  
(2)  Members: (a)  the Director of Health Services; 
 (b)  two members of the governing board; 
 (c)   a lawyer appointed by the governing board; 
 (d)   two   heads   of   clinical   departments   including   the   
beneficiary department; 
 (e)   the head of Finance; 
 (f)   the Chief Director of the Ministry of Health; 
 (g)  the  Matron;  
 (h)  two heads of Department including clinical heads 
(3)  Secretary        the head of procurement or officer with responsibility for 
procurement. 
(4)  Quorum Five  
(5)  Voting Decisions    shall    be    by    simple    majority    and    the    
chairperson shall have a casting vote. 
(6)  Functions The Committee shall 
 (a)   review  procurement  plans  in  order  to  ensure  that  
they  support  the  objectives  and  operations  of  the  
Institution or Entity; 
 (b)  confirm the range of acceptable costs of items to be 
procured and match these with the available funds in 
the approved budget; 
 (c)   review     the     schedules     of     procurement     and     
specifications  and  also  ensure  that  the  procurement  
procedures  to  be  followed  are  in  strict  conformity  
with   the   provisions   of   this   Act,   its   operating   
regulations and guidelines;  

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
 (d)   ensure  that  the  necessary  concurrent  approval  is  
secured  from  the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board,  in  
terms  of  the  applicable  threshold  in  Schedule  3  of  
this Act, prior to the award of the contract; 
 (e)          facilitate     contract     administration     and     ensure     
compliance  with  all  reporting  requirements  under  
this Act; and 
                                                (f)     ensure  that  stores  and  equipment  are  disposed  of  in  
compliance with this Act. 
8.  Bank of Ghana or Financial Institutions Tender Committee 
(1)  Chairperson the Governor or CEO 
(2)  Members: (a) two members of the Board; 
 (b)  The First Deputy Governor; 
 (c)   a Deputy Minister for Finance; 
 (d)  a representative of the Chief of Staff; 
 (e)   the Head of Finance; and 
 (f)   a representative of the beneficiary department. 
(3)  Secretary the secretary to the Bank 
(4)  Quorum Five  
(5)  Voting Decisions  shall  be  by  simple  majority  should  voting  
become  necessary  and  the  chairperson  shall  have  a  
casting vote. 
(6)  Functions The Committee shall 
 (a)   review  procurement  plans  in  order  to  ensure  that  
they  support  the  objectives  and  operations  of  the  
Institution or Entity; 
 (b)  confirm the range of acceptable costs of items to be 
procured and match these with the available funds in 
the approved budget; 
 (c)        review    the    schedules    of    procurement    and    
specifications  and  also  ensure  that  the  procurement  
procedures  to  be  followed  are  in  strict  conformity  
with   the   provisions   of   this   Act,   its   operating   
regulations and guidelines;  
  (d)  ensure  that  the  necessary  concurrent  approval  is  
secured  from  the  relevant  Tender  Review  Board,  in  
terms  of  the  applicable  threshold  in  Schedule  3  of  
this Act, prior to the award of the contract;  
 (e)        facilitate    contract    administration    and    ensure    
compliance  with  all  reporting  requirements  under  
this Act; and 
 (f)   ensure  that  stores  and  equipment  of  the  Bank  are  
disposed of in compliance with this Act. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
SCHEDULE 2 
(Section 20) 
 
COMPOSITION OF TENDER REVIEW 
AUTHORITIES 
 
1. CENTRAL TENDER REVIEW BOARD 
(1)  Membership                    Nine                    
(2)  Chairperson An  eminent  person  appointed  by  the  President  on  the  
advice of the Minister for Finance 
(3)  Members (a)     two     public     sector     persons     conversant     with     
procurement principles and procedures appointed by 
the Minister; 
 (b)  three  professionals  appointed  by  the  Institute  of  
Engineers,  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  and  
Institute of Surveyors; 
 (c)   the  Attorney-General  or  the  representative  of  the  
Attorney-General; 
 (d)    the    Director    General,    National    Development    
Planning Commission; and 
 (e)   the Chief Director, Ministry of Finance. 
(4)  Secretary A  Director  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  appointed  by  the  
Minister.  
 
2. MINISTRY TENDER REVIEW BOARD 
   (in the national capital only) 
(1)  Membership Five  
(2)  Chairperson The  chairman  of  a  Service  Council  or  a  public  sector  
person  with  considerable  experience  in  procurement, 
business  management  or  engineering,  appointed  by  the  
Minister 
(3)  Members (a)   three  heads  of  departments  or  agencies  within  the  
Ministry appointed by the Sector Minister; 
 (b)   two  persons  with  experience  in  procurement  from  
the private sector with engineering, legal, accounting 
or  business  background  appointed  by  the  Sector  
Minister; 
 (c)   the Chief Director of the Ministry; 
 (d)   the  Director  of  Finance  and  Administration  of  the  
Ministry; and 
Member and Secretary: (e)  the head of Logistics and Supplies or the head of the 
procurement unit. 
 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
3. REGIONAL TENDER REVIEW BOARD  
(1)  Membership                    Five                    
(2)  Chairperson: An   eminent   private   or   public   sector   person   with   
procurement,    business    management    or    engineering    
background  resident  in  the  Region  appointed  by  the  
Regional Co-ordinating Council. 
(3)  Members: (a)  one public sector person resident in the Region with 
experience    in    procurement    appointed    by    the    
Regional Co-ordinating Council; 
 (b)   one   private   sector   person   with   experience   in   
procurement   or   business   resident   in   the   Region   
appointed by the Minister of Local Government and 
Rural Development; 
 (c)   the Regional Co-ordinating Director; 
 (d)  the Regional Directors of 
  (i)  Ghana Highways Authority; 
  (ii)  Ghana Education Service; 
  (iii) Ministry of Food and Agriculture;     and 
  (iv) Ministry of Health; and 
 (e)   a  representative  of  the  Ministry  of  Justice  in  the  
Region. 
(4)  Secretary: the Regional Director of Planning 
4. DISTRICT TENDER REVIEW BOARD  
(1)  Membership: Five  
(2)  Chairperson: A  public  sector  person  resident  in  the  district  with  
procurement,  business  management  or  engineering  
background appointed by the District Assembly. 
(3)  Members: (a)   the  chairperson,  Works  Committee  of  the  District  
Assembly;  
 (b)   the  chairperson,  Finance  Committee  of  the  District  
Assembly; and 
 (c)   one  private  sector  procurement  specialist  appointed  
by the District Assembly. 
 (d)  the District Directors of  
  (i)  Urban Roads/Feeder Roads; 
  (ii)  Ghana Education Service; 
  (iii) Health Services; and 
  (iv)  Ministry of Food and Agriculture; 
 (e)   the  representative  of  the  Attorney-General’s  Office  
in the district. 
(4)  Secretary: the Director of Planning. 
 
SCHEDULE 3 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
(Section 21, Section 42, Section 44, Section 66) 
 
 1. Thresholds for Procurement Methods 
 
Procurement Method/Advertisement Contract Value Threshold  
(1)  Pre-qualification 
(a)   Goods Above GHC 35 billion 
(b)   Works Above GHC 70billion 
(c)   Technical Services (not more than 10% of cost of            works) 
(2)   International Competitive Tender  
(a)   Goods Above GHC 15.0 billion 
(b)   Works Above GHC 20. 0 billion 
(c)   Technical Services Above GHC 2.0 billion 
(3)   National Competitive Tender  
(a)   Goods More than GHC 200 million up to      GHC 2.0 billion 
(b)   Works More than GHC 500 million up to 
   GHC 15 billion  
(c)   Technical Services More than GHC 200 million up to  
   GHC 2.0 billion 
(4) Restricted Tendering Subject to Approval by PB 
(5) Price Quotation 
(a)  Goods Up to GHC 200million 
(b)   Works Up to GHC 500million 
(c )  Technical Services Up to GHC 200million 
(6) Single Source Procurement and Selection Subject to Approval by PB 
(7) Advertisements for Expressions of Interest 
   for Consulting Services in local newspapers Above GHC 700million 
(8)   Least-Cost Selection Up to GHC 700million 
(9) Selection based on Consultant’s Qualifications Up to GHC 350m 
(10)   Single Source-Selection Subject to Approval by PB  
 
2. (B1) Decentralised Procuring Entities - Thresholds for      Review/Approval 
Authority (Amounts in GHC)
 
 
 
   Technical    Consulting 
    Authority    Goods   Works  Services     Services 
(1) Head of Entity Up to 50m Up to 100m Up to 50m  Up to GHC50m 
(2) Entity Tender >50m-250m >100m-500m     >50m-250m     >50m-100m 
   Committee  
(3)       District       Tender       >250m-1.0b       >500m-2.0b       >250m-1.0b              >100m-500m       
   Review Board  
(4) Ministerial and >1.0b-8.0b >2.0b-15.0b >1.0b-8.0b  >500m-3.5b 
   Regional Tender 
   Review Board  
(5) Central Tender Above 8.0b Above 15.0b Above 8.0b  Above 3.5b 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
   Review Board 
 
 
 
 
 
3. (B1) Other Procuring Entities - Thresholds for Review/Approval Authority 
 (Amounts in GHC) 
 
   Technical    Consulting 
    Authority    Goods   Works  Services     Services 
(1) Head of Entity Up to 50m Up to 100m Up to 50m  Up to 50m  
(2) Entity Tender > 50m- 1.0b >100m-2.0b >50m-1.0b  >50m-500m 
   Committee  
(3) Ministerial and >1.0b-8.0b >2.0b-15.0b >1.0b-8.0b  >500m-3.5b 
   Regional Tender 
   Review Board  
(4) Central Tender Above 8.0b Above 15.0b Above 8.0b  Above 3.5b 
   Review Board
 
 
SCHEDULE 4 
(Section 50, Section 68) 
 
STANDARD TENDER DOCUMENTS AND STANDARD REQUEST FOR 
PROPOSALS. 
 
 
 1.    Standard Tender Document for Procurement of Works 
 2.    Standard Tender Document for Procurement of Works (Smaller Contracts) 
 3.    Standard Tender Document for Roads-Major 
 4.    Standard Tender Document for Roads-Minor 
 5.    Standard Tender Document for Procurement of Goods 
 6.    Standard Tender Document for Procurement of Health Goods 
 7.    Standard Tender Document for Procurement of Text Books 
 8.    Standard Tender Document for Procurement of IT Systems   
 9.    Standard Request for Proposals for Selection of Consultants 
10.   Standard Document for Prequalification of Suppliers, Consultants and Contractors 
11.   Standard Document for request for Expression of Interest  
12.   Sample Format Request for Quotations 
13.   Disposal of Stores (Goods and Equipment) 
14.   Board of Survey Form/ Disposal Certificate /Destruction Certificate 
15.   Standard  Tender  Evaluation  Format  and  Reporting  Format  for  Goods,  Works  and  
Selection of Consultants 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
16.   Standard and Sample Contracts for Consultants Services 
Complex Time Based Assignments 
Lump-sum remuneration 
Small Assignments Time Based Payments 
Lump Sum payments. 
 
 
 
Date of Gazette notification: 31st December, 2003. 

Act 663 Public Procurement Act, 2003 
  This  printed  impression  has  been  carefully  compared  by  me  with  the  Bill  which  
has been passed by Parliament, and found by me to be a true copy of that Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
Clerk to Parliament 
 
 
 
 
 
 Date of authentication: 
 
 
 
 
 I hereby signify assent to this Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
President 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Assent: